

<h2>CHAPTER I</h2>

<p class="indent">"Will you leave that donkey alone,"
said Patsy Mac Cann to his daughter.
"I never heard the like of it," he continued
testily. "I tell you the way you
do be going on with the ass is enough
to make a Christian man swear, so it
is."</p>

<p class="indent">"You let me be," she replied. "If I was
doing hurt or harm to you I wouldn't mind,
and if I am fond of the ass itself what does
it matter to anybody?"</p>

<p class="indent">"It's this way, that I don't like to see a
woman kissing an ass on the snout, it's not
natural nor proper."</p>

<p class="indent">"A lot you know about natural and
proper. Let you leave me alone now; and,
besides that, doesn't the ass like it?"</p>

<p class="indent">"That's not a reason; sure it doesn't
matter in the world what an ass likes or dislikes,
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page4" id="page4"></a>[pg 4]</span>
and, anyhow, an ass doesn't like anything
except carrots and turnips."</p>

<p class="indent">"This one does," said she stoutly.</p>

<p class="indent">"And a body might be kissing an ass
until the black day of doom and he wouldn't
mind it."</p>

<p class="indent">"This one minds."</p>

<p class="indent">"Kissing an old ass!"</p>

<p class="indent">"One has to be kissing something."</p>

<p class="indent">"Let you kiss me then and get done with
it," said he.</p>

<p class="indent">She regarded him in amazement.</p>

<p class="indent">"What would I kiss you for? Sure
you're my father, and aren't you as old as
the hills?"</p>

<p class="indent">"Well, well, you're full of fun, and that's
what I say. Take the winkers off that
donkey's face, and let him get a bit to eat;
there's grass enough, God knows, and it's
good grass."</p>

<p class="indent">Mary busied herself with the winkers and
the bit while her father continued:</p>

<p class="indent">"What I wish is this, that Christian
people were able to eat grass like the
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page5" id="page5"></a>[pg 5]</span>
beasts, and then there wouldn't be any more
trouble in the world. Are you listening
to me, Mary, or are you listening to the
donkey?"</p>

<p class="indent">"It's you I'm listening to."</p>

<p class="indent">"I say this, that if every person had
enough to eat there'd be no more trouble in
the world and we could fight our fill. What
have you got in the basket?"</p>

<p class="indent">"I've the loaf that I bought in the shop
at Knockbeg, and the half loaf that you took
out of the woman's window—it's fresher
than the other one."</p>

<p class="indent">"I was guided," said her father. "We'll
eat that one first the way no person can
claim it. What else have you got?"</p>

<p class="indent">"I've the white turnip that I found in a
field."</p>

<p class="indent">"There's great nourishment in turnips;
the cattle do get fat on them in winter."</p>

<p class="indent">"And I've the two handfuls of potatoes
that you gathered at the bend of the
road."</p>

<p class="indent">"Roast themselves in the embers, for
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page6" id="page6"></a>[pg 6]</span>
that's the only road to cook a potato. What
way are we going to eat to-night?"</p>

<p class="indent">"We'll eat the turnip first, and then
we'll eat the bread, and after that we'll
eat the potatoes."</p>

<p class="indent">"And fine they'll taste. I'll cut the
turnip for you with the sailorman's jackknife."</p>

<hr />

<p class="indent">The day had drawn to its close. The
stars had not yet come, nor the moon. Far
to the west a red cloud poised on the horizon
like a great whale and, moment by moment,
it paled and faded until it was no more than
a pink flush. On high, clouds of pearl and
snow piled and fell and sailed away on easy
voyages. It was the twilight—a twilight
of such quietude that one could hear the
soft voice of the world as it whispered
through leaf and twig. There was no
breeze to swing the branches of the trees
or to creep among the rank grasses and
set them dancing, and yet everywhere
there was unceasing movement and a
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page7" id="page7"></a>[pg 7]</span>
sound that never ceased. About them,
for mile upon mile, there was no habitation
of man; there was no movement anywhere
except when a bird dipped and soared in a
hasty flight homewards, or when a beetle
went slugging by like a tired bullet.</p>

<p class="indent">Mary had unharnessed the ass and bade
him, with an affectionate kiss, to eat his
full. The donkey stood for a moment
with his ears and tail hanging down, then
he lifted both his ears and his tail, slung
up his ragged head, bared his solid teeth,
and brayed furiously for two minutes.
That accomplished he trotted briskly a
few paces, bent to the grass, and began
to eat so eagerly that one would think
eating was more of a novelty to him than
it could be to an ass of his years.</p>

<p class="indent">"The sound of that beast's voice does
get on my nerves," said Patsy.</p>

<p class="indent">"He has a powerful voice, sure enough,
God bless him! Sit down there by the
hedge and light the fire while I'm getting
the things ready; the night will be on us
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page8" id="page8"></a>[pg 8]</span>
in a few minutes and it will be a cold
night."</p>

<p class="indent">While she moved busily from the cart
to the hedge her father employed himself
lighting a fire of turf in a wrinkled bucket.
When this was under way he pulled out
a pipe, black as a coal, and off which half
the shank was broken, and this he put
into his mouth. At the moment he seemed
to be sunken in thought, his eyes to the
grass and his feet planted, and it was in a
musing voice that he spoke:</p>

<p class="indent">"Do you know what I'd do, Mary, if I had
a bottle of porter beside me in this field?"</p>

<p class="indent">"I do well," she replied; "you'd drink
it."</p>

<p class="indent">"I would so, but before I'd drink it
I'd put the end of this pipe into it, for it's
newly cracked, and it sticks to my lips in
a way that would anger a man wanting a
smoke, and if I could stick it into the
porter it would be cured. I don't suppose,
now, that you have a sup of porter in the
cart!"</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page9" id="page9"></a>[pg 9]</span>
"I have not."</p>

<p class="indent">"Because if you had a small sup I'd be
able to get a smoke this night, as well as a
drink."</p>

<p class="indent">"You're full of fun," said she sourly.</p>

<p class="indent">"I saw a bottle in your hand a while
back," he continued musingly, "and it
looked like a weighty bottle."</p>

<p class="indent">"It's full to the neck with spring water."</p>

<p class="indent">"Ah!" said her father, and he regarded
that distant horizon whereon the pink
cloud was now scarcely visible as a pinkness
and was no longer the shape of a
great whale.</p>

<p class="indent">After a moment he continued in a careless
voice:</p>

<p class="indent">"You might hand me the bottle of
spring water, alanna, till I wet my lips
with it. It's a great thing for the thirst,
I'm told, and it's healthy beside that."</p>

<p class="indent">"I'm keeping that sup of water to make
the tea when we'd be wanting it."</p>

<p class="indent">"Well, I'll only take a drop out of it,
and I won't lose the cork."</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page10" id="page10"></a>[pg 10]</span>
"You can get it yourself, then," said
Mary, "for I've plenty to do and you
haven't."</p>

<p class="indent">Her father, rolling his tough chin with
his fingers, went to the cart. He found
the bottle, lifted the cork, smelt it, tasted:</p>

<p class="indent">"It is spring water indeed," said he, and
he thumped the cork back again with some
irritation and replaced the bottle in the
cart.</p>

<p class="indent">"I thought you wanted a drink," said
his daughter mildly.</p>

<p class="indent">"So I do," he replied, "but I can't
stand the little creatures that do be wriggling
about in spring water. I wouldn't like to
be swallowing them unknown. Ah! them
things don't be in barrels that you buy in
a shop, and that's a fact."</p>

<p class="indent">She was preparing the potatoes when a
remark from her father caused her to pause.</p>

<p class="indent">"What is it?" said she.</p>

<p class="indent">"It's a bird. I saw it for a second
against a white piece of a cloud, and I
give you my word that it's as big as a
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page11" id="page11"></a>[pg 11]</span>
haystack. There it is again," he continued
excitedly, "there's three of them."</p>

<p class="indent">For a few minutes they followed the
flight of these amazing birds, but the
twilight had almost entirely departed and
darkness was brooding over the land.
They did not see them any more.</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page12" id="page12"></a>[pg 12]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER II</h2>

<p class="indent">And yet it was but a short distance
from where they camped that the angels
first put foot to earth.</p>

<p class="indent">It is useless to question what turmoil
of wind or vagary of wing brought them
to this desert hill instead of to a place
more worthy of their grandeur, for, indeed,
they were gorgeously apparelled in
silken robes of scarlet and gold and purple;
upon their heads were crowns high in
form and of curious, intricate workmanship,
and their wings, stretching ten feet
on either side, were of many and shining
colours.</p>

<p class="indent">Enough that here they did land, and in
this silence and darkness they stood for
a few moments looking about them.</p>

<p class="indent">Then one spoke:</p>

<p class="indent">"Art," said he, "we were too busy
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page13" id="page13"></a>[pg 13]</span>
coming down to look about us carefully;
spring up again a little way, and see if
there is any house in sight."</p>

<p class="indent">At the word one of the three stepped
forward a pace, and leaped twenty feet
into the air; his great wings swung out
as he leaped, they beat twice, and he
went circling the hill in steady, noiseless
flight.</p>

<p class="indent">He returned in a minute:</p>

<p class="indent">"There are no houses here, but a little
way below I saw a fire and two people
sitting beside it."</p>

<p class="indent">"We will talk to them," said the other.
"Show the way, Art."</p>

<p class="indent">"Up then," said Art.</p>

<p class="indent">"No," said the Angel who had not yet
spoken. "I am tired of flying. We will
walk to this place you speak of."</p>

<p class="indent">"Very well," replied Art, "let us walk."</p>

<p class="indent">And they went forward.</p>

<hr />

<p class="indent">Around the little bucket of fire where
Mac Cann and his daughter were sitting
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page14" id="page14"></a>[pg 14]</span>
there was an intense darkness. At the
distance of six feet they could still see,
but delicately, indistinctly, and beyond
that the night hung like a velvet curtain.
They did not mind the night, they did not
fear it, they did not look at it: it was
around them, full of strangeness, full of
mystery and terror, but they looked only
at the glowing brazier, and in the red
cheer of that they were content.</p>

<p class="indent">They had eaten the bread and the
turnip, and were waiting for the potatoes
to be cooked, and as they waited an odd
phrase, an exclamation, a sigh would pass
from one to the other; and then, suddenly,
the dark curtain of night moved noiselessly,
and the three angels stepped nobly in the
firelight.</p>

<p class="indent">For an instant neither Mac Cann nor
his daughter made a movement; they
did not make a sound. Here was terror,
and astonishment the sister of terror:
they gaped: their whole being was in
their eyes as they stared. From Mac
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page15" id="page15"></a>[pg 15]</span>
Cann's throat came a noise; it had no
grammatical significance, but it was
weighted with all the sense that is in a
dog's growl or a wolf's cry. Then the
youngest of the strangers came forward:</p>

<p class="indent">"May we sit by your fire for a little
time?" said he. "The night is cold, and
in this darkness one does not know where
to go."</p>

<p class="indent">At the sound of words Patsy seized hold
of his sliding civilization.</p>

<p class="indent">"To be sure," he stammered. "Why
wouldn't your honour sit down? There
isn't a seat, but you're welcome to the
grass and the light of the fire."</p>

<p class="indent">"Mary," he continued, looking hastily
around—</p>

<p class="indent">But Mary was not there. The same
instant those tall forms strode from the
darkness in front Mary had slipped, swift
and noiseless as the shadow of a cat, into
the darkness behind her.</p>

<p class="indent">"Mary," said her father again, "these
are decent people, I'm thinking. Let you
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page16" id="page16"></a>[pg 16]</span>
come from wherever you are, for I'm sure
they wouldn't hurt yourself or myself."</p>

<p class="indent">As swiftly as she had disappeared she
reappeared.</p>

<p class="indent">"I was looking if the ass was all right,"
said she sullenly.</p>

<p class="indent">She sat again by the brazier, and began
to turn the potatoes with a stick. She
did not appear to be taking any heed of
the strangers, but it is likely that she was
able to see them without looking, because,
as is well known, women and birds are
able to see without turning their heads,
and that is indeed a necessary provision,
for they are both surrounded by enemies.</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page17" id="page17"></a>[pg 17]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER III</h2>

<p class="indent">The remarkable thing about astonishment
is that it can only last for an instant.
No person can be surprised for more than
that time. You will come to terms with
a ghost within two minutes of its appearance,
and it had scarcely taken that time
for Mac Cann and his daughter to become
one with the visitors.</p>

<p class="indent">If the surprisor and the surprisee are
mutually astonished, then, indeed, there is
a tangle out of which anything may emerge,
for two explanations are necessary at the
one moment, and two explanations can no
more hold the same position in time than
two bodies can occupy the same lodgment
in space.</p>

<p class="indent">It needed alone that the angels should
proclaim their quality for the situation to
arrange itself naturally.</p>

<p class="indent">Man is a scientific creature; he labels
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page18" id="page18"></a>[pg 18]</span>
his ignorance and shelves it: mystery
affrights him, it bores him, but when he
has given a name to any appearance then
mystery flies away, and reality alone remains
for his cogitation. Later, perhaps,
reality will enrage and mystify him more
profoundly than any unexpectedness can
do.</p>

<p class="indent">The Mac Canns, so far as they professed
a religion, were Catholics. Deeper than
that they were Irish folk. From their
cradles, if ever they had cradles other
than a mother's breast and shoulder, they
had supped on wonder. They believed
as easily as an animal does, for most
creatures are forced to credit everything
long before they are able to prove anything.
We have arranged to label these
faculties of imagination and prophecy
among the lesser creatures Instinct, and
with the label we have thrown overboard
more of mystery than we could afford to
live with. Later these may confront us
again in our proper souls, and the wonder
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page19" id="page19"></a>[pg 19]</span>
and terror so long overdue will compel
our tardy obeisance.</p>

<p class="indent">At the end of amazement, as of all else,
we go to sleep, and, within an hour of their
meeting, the angels and the Mac Canns
were stretched in one common unconsciousness.</p>

<p class="indent">The angels were asleep, their attitudes
proclaimed it. Patsy was asleep, his nose,
with the unpleasant emphasis of a cracked
trumpet, pealed wheezy confirmation of his
slumber. His daughter was asleep, for
there by the brazier she lay, motionless
as the ground itself.</p>

<p class="indent">Perhaps she was not asleep. Perhaps
she was lying with her face to the skies,
staring through the darkness at the pale,
scarce stars, dreaming dreams and seeing
visions, while, all around, down the invisible
road and across the vanished fields
and the hills, night trailed her dusky robes
and crushed abroad her poppy.</p>

<p class="indent">Whether she had slept or not she was
the first to arise in the morning.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page20" id="page20"></a>[pg 20]</span>
A pale twilight was creeping over the
earth, and through it one could see chilly
trees and shivering grass; the heavy clouds
huddled together as though they were
seeking warmth on those grisly heights;
the birds had not yet left their nests; it
was an hour of utter silence and uncomeliness;
an hour for blind and despairing
creatures to move forward spitefully, cursing
themselves and the powers; an hour
when imagination has no function, and hope
would fly again to the darkness rather than
remain in that livid wilderness, for this
was not yet the thin child of the dawn,
crowned with young buds and active as
a wintry leaf; it was the abortion of the
dawn, formless, heavy, and detestable.</p>

<p class="indent">Moving cautiously in that shade, Mary
herself seemed no more than a shadow;
she diminished thin and formless as a
wraith, while she trod carefully to and
fro from the cart to the hedge.</p>

<p class="indent">She sat down, unloosed her hair and
commenced to brush it.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page21" id="page21"></a>[pg 21]</span>
In this colourless light her hair had no
colour, but was of astonishing length and
thickness; it flowed about her like a cloak,
and as she sat it rolled and crept on the
grass. She did not often tend her hair
thus. Sometimes she plaited it for the
sake of convenience, so that windy days
would not whip it into her eyes or lash
her cheeks; sometimes, through sheer laziness,
she did not even plait it, she rolled
it into a great ball and drew a wide, masculine
cap over its brightness; and now,
before the day had broken, sitting in a
ghastly lightness, which was neither light
nor darkness, she was attending to her
hair.</p>

<p class="indent">And this hair perplexed her, for she did
not know what to do with it; she did not
know whether it was to be seen or not
seen; whether to braid it in two great
ropes, or roll it carelessly or carefully
above her head, or let it hang loosely about
her shoulders held only at the nape with
a piece of ribbon or stuff. An hesitation
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page22" id="page22"></a>[pg 22]</span>
such as this was new to her; she had never
had occasion for such forethought; it
was strange and inquieting; more disturbing,
indeed, than the visit at black of
night of those tall strangers whose eyes
and voices were so quiet, and whose appointments
flashed in the firelight while
they spoke to her father of the things in
which travellers are interested.</p>

<p class="indent">She looked at them where they lay, but
they were scarcely more than visible—a
tangle of flowing cloths and great limbs
fading away in the rank grasses and the
obscurity, and to her mind the real wonder
was not that they had come, but that they
were still there, and that they were sleeping
deeply and peacefully as she had slept so
often, with her head pillowed on her arm
and her limbs folded calmly between the
earth and the sky.</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page23" id="page23"></a>[pg 23]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER IV</h2>

<p class="indent">Her hair was not braided; it was tied at
the neck with a piece of whitish cloth torn
from some part of her clothing, and upon her
shoulders it billowed and rolled in magnificent
living abundance.</p>

<p class="indent">Very gently she moved to where her
father lay on his back with his mouth open
and his black chin jutting at the sky. He
was breathing through his mouth, so he was
not snoring any longer. She lifted the three
or four sacks which covered him, and rocked
his shoulders cautiously until he awakened.</p>

<p class="indent">Her father awakened exactly as she did,
exactly as every open-air animal does; his
eyes flew wide, instantly and entirely wakeful,
and he looked at her with full comprehension
of their adventure. He raised
softly on an elbow and glanced to where
the strangers were; then nodded to his
daughter and rose noiselessly to his feet.
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page24" id="page24"></a>[pg 24]</span>
She beckoned him and they stepped a few
paces away so that they might talk in
security.</p>

<p class="indent">Mary was about to speak but her father
prevented her:</p>

<p class="indent">"Listen," he whispered, "the best thing
we can do is to load the things into the cart,
without making any noise, mind you! then
we'll yoke the little ass as easy as anything,
and then I'll get into the cart and I'll drive
off as hard as ever I can pelt, and you can
run beside the ass with a stick in your hand
and you welting the devil out of him to
make him go quick. I'm no good myself at
the running, and that's why I'll get into the
cart, but you can run like a hare, and that's
why you'll wallop the beast."</p>

<p class="indent">"Mind now," he continued fiercely, "we
don't know who them fellows are at all, and
what would the priest say if he heard we
were stravaiging the country with three big,
buck angels, and they full of tricks maybe;
so go you now and be lifting in the things
and I'll give you good help myself."</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page25" id="page25"></a>[pg 25]</span>
"I'll do nothing of the kind," whispered
Mary angrily, "and it wasn't for that I
woke you up."</p>

<p class="indent">"Won't you, indeed?" said her father
fiercely.</p>

<p class="indent">"What would they be thinking of us at all
if they were to rouse and see us sneaking off
in that way? I'm telling you now that I
won't do it, and that you won't do it either,
and if you make a move to the cart I'll give
a shout that will waken the men."</p>

<p class="indent">"The devil's in you, you strap!" replied
her father, grinding his teeth at her. "What
call have we to be mixing ourselves up with
holy angels that'll be killing us maybe in an
hour or half an hour; and maybe they're not
angels at all but men that do be travelling
the land in a circus and they full of fun and
devilment?"</p>

<p class="indent">"It's angels they are," replied his daughter
urgently, "and if they're not angels itself
they are rich men, for there's big rings of
gold on their fingers, and every ring has a
diamond in it, and they've golden chains
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page26" id="page26"></a>[pg 26]</span>
across their shoulders, I'm telling you, and
the stuff in their clothes is fit for the children
of a king. It's rich and very rich they are."</p>

<p class="indent">Mac Cann rasped his chin with his thumb.</p>

<p class="indent">"Do you think they are rich folk?"</p>

<p class="indent">"I do, indeed."</p>

<p class="indent">"Then," said her father in an abstracted
tone, "we won't say anything more about
it."</p>

<p class="indent">After a moment he spoke again:</p>

<p class="indent">"What were you thinking about yourself?"</p>

<p class="indent">"I was thinking," she replied, "that when
they waken up in a little while there won't
be anything at all for them to eat and they
strangers."</p>

<p class="indent">"Hum!" said her father.</p>

<p class="indent">"There's two cold potatoes in the basket,"
she continued, "and a small piece of bread,
and there isn't anything more than that;
so let you be looking around for something
to eat the way we won't be put to shame
before the men."</p>

<p class="indent">"It's easy talking!" said he; "where am
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page27" id="page27"></a>[pg 27]</span>
I to look? Do you want me to pick red
herrings out of the grass and sides of bacon
off the little bushes?"</p>

<p class="indent">"We passed a house last night a mile
down the road," said Mary; "go you there
and get whatever you're able to get, and if
you can't get anything buy it off the people
in the house. I've three shillings in my
pocket that I was saving for a particular
thing, but I'll give them to you because I
wouldn't like to be shamed before the
strange men."</p>

<p class="indent">Her father took the money:</p>

<p class="indent">"I wish I knew that you had it yesterday,"
he growled, "I wouldn't have gone to
sleep with a throat on me like a mid-summer
ditch and it full of dust and pismires."</p>

<p class="indent">Mary pushed him down the road.</p>

<p class="indent">"Be back as quick as you are able, and
buy every kind of thing that you can get for
the three shillings."</p>

<p class="indent">She watched him stamping heavily down
the road, and then she returned again to
their encampment.</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page28" id="page28"></a>[pg 28]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER V</h2>

<p class="indent">The visitors had not awakened.</p>

<p class="indent">Now the air was growing clearer; the
first livid pallor of the dawn had changed
to a wholesome twilight, and light was rolling
like clear smoke over the land. The air
looked cold, and it began to look sharp
instead of muddy; now the trees and bushes
stood apart; they seemed lonely and unguarded
in that chill dawning; they seemed
like living things which were cold and a
little frightened in an immensity to which
they were foreign and from which they had
much to dread.</p>

<p class="indent">Of all unnatural things, if that word can
be used in any context, there is none more
unnatural than silence, there is none so
terrifying; for silence means more than itself,
it means also immobility; it is the
symbol and signature of death, and from it
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page29" id="page29"></a>[pg 29]</span>
no one knows what may come at an instant;
for silence is not quietness, it is the
enemy of quietness; against it your watch
must climb the tower and stare in vain;
against it your picket must be set, and he
will thrust a lance to the sound of his own
pulses; he will challenge the beating of his
own heart, and hear his own harness
threatening him at a distance.</p>

<p class="indent">To walk in a forest when there is no wind
to stir the branches and set the leaves tapping
upon the boughs, this is terrifying; a
lonely sea stretching beyond sight and upon
which there is no ripple holds the same
despair, and a grassy plain from whence
there is no movement visible has too its
desolating horror.</p>

<p class="indent">But these things did not haunt the girl.
She did not heed the silence for she did not
listen to it; she did not heed the immensity
for she did not see it. In space and silence
she had been cradled; they were her foster-parents,
and if ever she looked or listened it
was to see and hear something quite other
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page30" id="page30"></a>[pg 30]</span>
than these. Now she did listen and look.
She listened to the breathing of the sleepers,
and soon, for she was a female, she looked
to see what they were like.</p>

<p class="indent">She leaned softly over one. He was a
noble old man with a sweeping, white beard
and a great brow; the expression of his
quiet features was that of a wise infant;
her heart went out to him and she smiled at
him in his sleep.</p>

<p class="indent">She trod to the next and bent again. He
was younger, but not young; he looked
about forty years of age; his features were
regular and very determined; his face
looked strong, comely as though it had been
chiselled from a gracious stone; there was a
short coal-black beard on his chin.</p>

<p class="indent">She turned to the third sleeper, and halted
blushing. She remembered his face, caught
on the previous night in one lightning peep
while she slid away from their approach. It
was from him she had fled in the night, and
for him that her hair was now draping her
shoulders in unaccustomed beauty.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page31" id="page31"></a>[pg 31]</span>
She did not dare go near him; she was
afraid that if she bent over him he would
flash open his eyes and look at her, and, as
yet, she could not support such a look. She
knew that if she were stretched in sleep and
he approached to lean across her, she would
awaken at the touch of his eyes, and she
would be ashamed and frightened.</p>

<p class="indent">She did not look at him.</p>

<p class="indent">She went again to her place and set to
building a fire in the brazier, and, while
she sat, a voice began to sing in the dawn;
not loud, but very gently, very sweetly. It
was so early for a bird to sing, and she did
not recognise that tune although the sound
of it was thrilling through all her body.
Softly, more softly, O Prophetic Voice! I
do not know your speech; I do not know
what happiness you are promising; is it of
the leaves you tell and of a nest that rocks
high on a leafy spray; there your mate swings
cooing to herself. She swings and coos;
she is folded in peace, and the small, white
clouds go sailing by and they do not fall.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page32" id="page32"></a>[pg 32]</span>
So through unimagined ways went that
song, lifting its theme in terms that she
did not comprehend; but it was not a bird
that sang to her, it was her own heart making
its obscure music and lilting its secret,
wild lyrics in the dawn.</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page33" id="page33"></a>[pg 33]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER VI</h2>

<p class="indent">It was the donkey awakened them.</p>

<p class="indent">For some time he had been rolling along
the ground in ecstasy; now his agitated legs
were pointing at the sky while he scratched
his back against little stones and clumps of
tough clay; now he was lying flat rubbing
his jowl against these same clumps. He
stood up suddenly, shook himself, swung up
his tail and his chin, bared his teeth, fixed
his eye on eternity, and roared "hee-haw"
in a voice of such sudden mightiness, that
not alone did the sleepers bound from their
slumbers, but the very sun itself leaped
across the horizon and stared at him with its
wild eye.</p>

<p class="indent">Mary ran and beat the ass on the nose
with her fist, but whatever Mary did to
the ass was understood by him as a caress,
and he willingly suffered it—"hee-haw,"
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page34" id="page34"></a>[pg 34]</span>
said he again triumphantly, and he planted
his big head on her shoulder and stared
sadly into space.</p>

<p class="indent">He was thinking, and thought always
makes an ass look sad, but what he was
thinking about not even Mary knew; his
eye was hazy with cogitation, and he looked
as wise and as kindly as the eldest of the
three angels; indeed, although he had never
been groomed, he looked handsome also, for
he had the shape of a good donkey; his
muzzle and his paws were white, the rest of
his body was black and his eyes were brown.
That was the appearance of the donkey.</p>

<p class="indent">The angels arose and, much as the ass
did they shook themselves; there was no
further toilet than that practicable; they
ran their hands through their abundant hair,
and the two who had beards combed these
also with their fingers—then they looked
around them.</p>

<p class="indent">Now the birds were sweeping and climbing
on the shining air; they were calling and
shrieking and singing; fifty of them, and
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page35" id="page35"></a>[pg 35]</span>
all of the same kind, came dashing madly
together, and they all sang the one song, so
loud, so exultant, the heaven and earth
seemed to ring and ring again of their glee.</p>

<p class="indent">They passed, and three antic wings came
tumbling and flirting together; these had no
song or their happiness went far beyond all
orderly sound; they squealed as they
chased each other; they squealed as they
dropped twenty sheer feet towards the
ground, and squealed again as they recovered
on a swoop, and as they climbed
an hundred feet in three swift zig-zags,
they still squealed without intermission,
and then the three went flickering away
to the west, each trying to bite the tail
off the others.</p>

<p class="indent">There came a crow whose happiness was
so intense that he was not able to move;
he stood on the hedge for a long time, and
all that time he was trying hard to compose
himself to a gravity befitting the father of
many families, but every few seconds he
lost all control and bawled with fervour.
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page36" id="page36"></a>[pg 36]</span>
He examined himself all over; he peeped
under his feathers to see was his complexion
good; he parted the plumage of his tail
modishly; he polished his feet with his
bill, and then polished his bill on his left
thigh, and then he polished his left thigh
with the back of his neck. "I'm a hell of a
crow," said he, "and everybody admits it."
He flew with admirable carelessness over the
ass, and cleverly stole two claws and one
beak full of hair; but in mid-air he laughed
incautiously so that the hair fell out of his
beak, and in grabbing at that portion he
dropped the bits in his claws, and he got so
excited in trying to rescue these before they
reached the ground that his voice covered
all the other sounds of creation.</p>

<p class="indent">The sun was shining; the trees waved
their branches in delight; there was no
longer murk or coldness in the air; it
sparkled from every point like a vast jewel,
and the brisk clouds arraying themselves in
fleeces of white and blue raced happily aloft.</p>

<p class="indent">That was what the angels saw when they
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page37" id="page37"></a>[pg 37]</span>
looked abroad; a few paces distant the cart
was lying with its shafts up in the air, and a
tumble of miscellaneous rubbish was hanging
half in and half out of it; a little farther
the ass, in a concentrated manner, was
chopping grass as quickly as ever he could,
and, naturally enough, eating it; for after
thinking deeply we eat, and it is true wisdom
to do so.</p>

<p class="indent">The eldest of the angels observed the
donkey. He stroked his beard.</p>

<p class="indent">"One eats that kind of vegetable," said
he.</p>

<p class="indent">The others observed also.</p>

<p class="indent">"And," that angel continued, "the time
has come for us to eat."</p>

<p class="indent">The second eldest angel rolled his coal-black
chin in his hand and his gesture and
attitude were precisely those of Patsy Mac
Cann.</p>

<p class="indent">"I am certainly hungry," said he.</p>

<p class="indent">He picked a fistful of grass and thrust
some of it into his mouth, but after a
moment of difficulty he removed it again.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page38" id="page38"></a>[pg 38]</span>
"It is soft enough to eat," said he musingly,
"but I do not care greatly for its
taste."</p>

<p class="indent">The youngest angel made a suggestion.</p>

<p class="indent">"Let us talk to the girl," said he.</p>

<p class="indent">And they all moved over to Mary.</p>

<p class="indent">"Daughter," said the eldest of the three,
"we are hungry," and he beamed on her so
contentedly that all fear and diffidence fled
from her on the instant.</p>

<p class="indent">She replied:</p>

<p class="indent">"My father has gone down the road looking
for food; he will be coming back in a
minute or two, and he'll be bringing every
kind of thing that's nourishing."</p>

<p class="indent">"While we are waiting for him," said the
angel, "let us sit down and you can tell us
all about food."</p>

<p class="indent">"It is a thing we ought to learn at once,"
said the second angel.</p>

<p class="indent">So they sat in a half-circle opposite the
girl, and requested her to give them a lecture
on food.</p>

<p class="indent">She thought it natural they should require
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page39" id="page39"></a>[pg 39]</span>
information about earthly matters, but she
found, as all unpractised speakers do, that
she did not know at what point to begin on
her subject. Still, something had to be said,
for two of them were stroking their beards,
and one was hugging his knees, and all
three were gazing at her.</p>

<p class="indent">"Everything," said she, "that a body can
eat is good to eat, but some things do taste
nicer than others; potatoes and cabbage are
very good to eat, and so is bacon; my
father likes bacon when it's very salt, but
I don't like it that way myself; bread is a
good thing to eat, and so is cheese."</p>

<p class="indent">"What do you call this vegetable that the
animal is eating?" said the angel pointing to
the ass.</p>

<p class="indent">"That isn't a vegetable at all, sir, that's
only grass; every kind of animal eats it, but
Christians don't."</p>

<p class="indent">"Is it not good to eat?"</p>

<p class="indent">"Sure, I don't know. Dogs eat it when
they are sick, so it ought to be wholesome,
but I never heard tell of any person that ate
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page40" id="page40"></a>[pg 40]</span>
grass except they were dying of the hunger
and couldn't help themselves, poor creatures!
And there was a Jew once who was
a king, and they do say that he used to go
out with the cattle and eat the grass like
themselves, and nobody says that he didn't
get fat.</p>

<p class="indent">"But here's my father coming across the
fields (which is a queer way for him to come,
because he went away by the road), and I'm
thinking that he has a basket under his arm
and there will be food in it."</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page41" id="page41"></a>[pg 41]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER VII</h2>

<p class="indent">It was true enough. Mac Cann was
coming to them from a point at right angles
to where he was expected.</p>

<p class="indent">Now and again he turned to look over
his shoulder, and as he was taking advantage
of dips in the ground, bushes, and such-like
to shield his advance his daughter
divined that something had occurred in
addition to the purchase of food. She had
often before observed her father moving
with these precautionary tactics, and had
many times herself shared and even directed
a retreat which was full of interest.</p>

<p class="indent">When her father drew nigh he nodded
meaningly at her, set down a basket and a
bundle, and stood for a moment looking at
these while he thumbed his chin.</p>

<p class="indent">"Faith!" said he, "the world is full of
trouble, and that's a fact."</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page42" id="page42"></a>[pg 42]</span>
He turned to the strangers.</p>

<p class="indent">"And I'm telling you this, that if the
world wasn't full of trouble there'd be no life
at all for the poor. It's the only chance we
get is when people are full of woe, God help
them! and isn't that a queer thing?</p>

<p class="indent">"Mary," he turned, and his voice was
full of careless pride, "try if there isn't
some small thing or other in the basket,
and let your honours sit down on the
grass while the young girl is getting your
breakfast."</p>

<p class="indent">So the angels and Patsy sat down peacefully
on the grass, and Mary opened the
basket.</p>

<p class="indent">There were two loaves of bread in it, a
fine square of butter, a piece of cheese as big
as a man's hand and four times as thick;
there was a leg of mutton in the basket, and
only a little bit had been taken off it, a big
paper bag full of tea, a package of soft sugar,
a bottle full of milk, a bottle half full of
whisky, two tobacco pipes having silver
bands on their middles, and a big bar of
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page43" id="page43"></a>[pg 43]</span>
plug tobacco. Those were the things in the
basket.</p>

<p class="indent">Mary's eyes and her mouth opened when
she saw them, and she blessed herself,
but she made no sound; and when she
turned her face towards the company
there was no expression on it except that of
hospitality.</p>

<p class="indent">She cut slices from each of these things
and piled them on a large piece of paper in
the centre of the men; then she sat herself
down and they all prepared to eat.</p>

<p class="indent">The second angel turned courteously to
Mac Cann.</p>

<p class="indent">"Will you kindly begin to eat," said he,
"and by watching you we will know what
to do."</p>

<p class="indent">"There can be nothing more uncomely,"
said the first angel, "than to see people
acting in disaccord with custom; we will try
to do exactly as you do, and although you
may be troubled by our awkwardness
you will not be shocked by a lapse from
sacred tradition."</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page44" id="page44"></a>[pg 44]</span>
"Well!" said Patsy thoughtfully.</p>

<p class="indent">He stretched a hand towards the food.</p>

<p class="indent">"I'll stand in nobody's light, and teaching
people is God's own work; this is the way I
do it, your worships, and any one that likes
can follow me up."</p>

<p class="indent">He seized two pieces of bread, placed a
slice of cheese between them, and bit deeply
into that trinity.</p>

<p class="indent">The strangers followed his actions with
fidelity, and in a moment their mouths were
as full as his was and as content.</p>

<p class="indent">Patsy paused between bites:</p>

<p class="indent">"When I've this one finished," said he,
"I'll take two more bits of bread and I'll put
a lump of meat between them, and I'll eat
that."</p>

<p class="indent">"Ah!" said that one of the angels whose
mouth chanced to be free.</p>

<p class="indent">Patsy's eye roved over the rest of the
food.</p>

<p class="indent">"And after that," he continued, "we will
take a bit of whatever is handy."</p>

<p class="indent">In a short time there was nothing left on
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page45" id="page45"></a>[pg 45]</span>
the newspaper but soft sugar, butter, tea,
and tobacco. Patsy was abashed.</p>

<p class="indent">"I did think that there was more than
that," said he.</p>

<p class="indent">"I've had enough myself," he continued,
"but maybe your honours could eat more."</p>

<p class="indent">Two of the angels assured him that they
were quite satisfied, but the youngest angel
said nothing.</p>

<p class="indent">"I'm doubting that you had enough,"
said Patsy dubiously to him.</p>

<p class="indent">"I could eat more if I had it," returned
that one with a smile.</p>

<p class="indent">Mary went to the cart and returned bearing
two cold potatoes and a piece of bread,
and she placed these before the young angel.
He thanked her and ate these, and then he
ate the package of soft sugar, and then he
ate a little piece of the butter, but he didn't
care for it. He pointed to the plug of
tobacco:</p>

<p class="indent">"Does this be eaten?" he enquired.</p>

<p class="indent">"It does not," said Patsy. "If you ate a
bit of that you'd get a pain inside of your
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page46" id="page46"></a>[pg 46]</span>
belly that would last you for a month.
There's some people do smoke it, and there's
others do chew it; but I smoke it and chew
it myself, and that's the best way. There's
two pipes there on the paper, and I've a pipe
in my own pocket, so whichever of you
would like a smoke can do exactly as I do."</p>

<p class="indent">With a big jack-knife he shredded pieces
from the plug, and rolled these between his
palms, then he carefully stuffed his pipe,
pulled at it to see was it drawing well, lit the
tobacco, and heaved a sigh of contentment.
He smiled around the circle.</p>

<p class="indent">"That's real good," said he.</p>

<p class="indent">The strangers examined the pipes and
tobacco with curiosity, but they did not
venture to smoke, and they watched Patsy's
beatific face with kindly attention.</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page47" id="page47"></a>[pg 47]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER VIII</h2>

<p class="indent">Now at this moment Mary was devoured
with curiosity. She wanted to know how
her father had become possessed of the
basketful of provisions. She knew that
three shillings would not have purchased a
tithe of these goods, and, as she had now no
fear of the strangers, she questioned her
parent.</p>

<p class="indent">"Father," said she, "where did you get
all the good food?"</p>

<p class="indent">The angels had eaten of his bounty, so
Mac Cann considered that he had nothing to
fear from their side. He regarded them
while he pulled thoughtfully at his pipe.</p>

<p class="indent">"Do you know," said he, "that the
hardest thing in the world is to get the food,
and a body is never done looking for it. We
are after eating all that we got this morning,
so now we'll have to search for what we'll
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page48" id="page48"></a>[pg 48]</span>
eat to-night, and in the morning we'll
have to look again for more of it, and the day
after that, and every day until we are dead
we'll have to go on searching for the food."</p>

<p class="indent">"I would have thought," said the eldest
angel, "that of all problems food would be
the simplest in an organised society."</p>

<p class="indent">This halted Mac Cann for a moment.</p>

<p class="indent">"Maybe you're right, sir," said he kindly,
and he dismissed the interruption.</p>

<p class="indent">"I heard a man once, he was a stranger
to these parts, and he had a great deal of the
talk, he said that the folk at the top do grab
all the food in the world, and that then they
make every person work for them, and that
when you've done a certain amount of work
they give you just enough money to buy just
enough food to let you keep on working for
them. That's what the man said: a big,
angry man he was, with whiskers on him
like the whirlwind, and he swore he wouldn't
work for any one. I'm thinking myself
that he didn't work either. We were great
friends, that man and me, for I don't do any
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page49" id="page49"></a>[pg 49]</span>
work if I can help it; it's that I haven't
got the knack for work, and, God help me!
I've a big appetite. Besides that, the work
I'd be able to do in a day mightn't give me
enough to eat, and wouldn't I be cheated
then?"</p>

<p class="indent">"Father," said Mary, "where did you
get all the good food this morning?"</p>

<p class="indent">"I'll tell you that. I went down to the
bend of the road where the house is, and I
had the three shillings in my hand. When I
came to the house the door was standing
wide open. I hit it a thump of my fist, but
nobody answered me. 'God be with all
here,' said I, and in I marched. There was
a woman lying on the floor in one room, and
her head had been cracked with a stick;
and in the next room there was a man lying
on the floor, and his head had been cracked
with a stick. It was in that room I saw
the food packed nice and tight in the basket
that you see before you. I looked around
another little bit, and then I came away, for,
as they say, a wise man never found a dead
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page50" id="page50"></a>[pg 50]</span>
man, and I'm wise enough no matter what
I look like."</p>

<p class="indent">"Were the people all dead?" said Mary,
horrified.</p>

<p class="indent">"They were not—they only got a couple
of clouts. I'm thinking they are all right
by this, and they looking for the basket, but,
please God, they won't find it. But what
I'd like to know is this, who was it hit the
people with a stick, and then walked away
without the food and the drink and the
tobacco, for that's a queer thing."</p>

<p class="indent">He turned to his daughter.</p>

<p class="indent">"Mary, a cree, let you burn up that
basket in the brazier, for I don't like the
look of it at all, and it empty."</p>

<p class="indent">So Mary burned the basket with great
care while her father piled their goods on
the cart and yoked up the ass.</p>

<p class="indent">Meanwhile the angels were talking together,
and after a short time they approached
Mac Cann.</p>

<p class="indent">"If it is not inconvenient," said their
spokesman, "we would like to remain with
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page51" id="page51"></a>[pg 51]</span>
you for a time. We think that in your
company we may learn more than we might
otherwise do, for you seem to be a man of
ability, and at present we are rather lost in
this strange world."</p>

<p class="indent">"Sure," said Patsy heartily, "I haven't
the least objection in the world, only, if you
don't want to be getting into trouble, and if
you'll take my advice, I'd say that ye ought
to take off them kinds of clothes you're
wearing and get into duds something like
my own, and let you put your wings aside
and your fine high crowns, the way folk
won't be staring at you every foot of the
road, for I'm telling you that it's a bad thing
to have people looking after you when you
go through a little village or a town, because
you can never know who'll remember you
afterwards, and you maybe not wanting
to be remembered at all."</p>

<p class="indent">"If our attire," said the angel, "is such as
would make us remarkable——"</p>

<p class="indent">"It is," said Patsy. "People would
think you belonged to a circus, and the
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page52" id="page52"></a>[pg 52]</span>
crowds of the world would be after you in
every place."</p>

<p class="indent">"Then," replied the angel, "we will do as
you say."</p>

<p class="indent">"I have clothes enough in this bundle,"
said Patsy, with a vague air. "I found
them up there in the house, and I was thinking
of yourselves when I took them. Let
you put them on, and we will tie up your
own things in a sack and bury them here so
that when you want them again you'll be
able to get them, and then we can travel
wherever we please and no person will say a
word to us."</p>

<p class="indent">So the strangers retired a little way with
the bundle, and there they shed their finery.</p>

<p class="indent">When they appeared again they were clad
in stout, ordinary clothing. They did not
look a bit different from Patsy Mac Cann
except that they were all taller men than he,
but between his dilapidation and theirs there
was very little to choose.</p>

<p class="indent">Mac Cann dug a hole beside a tree and
carefully buried their property, then with a
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page53" id="page53"></a>[pg 53]</span>
thoughtful air he bade Mary move ahead
with the ass, while he and the angels stepped
forward at the tailboard.</p>

<p class="indent">They walked then through the morning
sunlight, and for a time they had little to say
to each other.</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page54" id="page54"></a>[pg 54]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER IX</h2>

<p class="indent">In truth Patsy Mac Cann was a very able
person.</p>

<p class="indent">For forty-two years he had existed on the
edges of a society which did not recognise
him in any way, and, as he might himself
have put it, he had not done so very badly
at all.</p>

<p class="indent">He lived as a bird lives, or a fish, or a
wolf. Laws were for other people, but they
were not for him; he crawled under or
vaulted across these ethical barriers, and
they troubled him no more than as he had
to bend or climb a little to avoid them—he
discerned laws as something to be avoided,
and it was thus he saw most things.</p>

<p class="indent">Religion and morality, although he paid
these an extraordinary reverence, were not
for him either; he beheld them from afar,
and, however they might seem beautiful or
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page55" id="page55"></a>[pg 55]</span>
foolish, he left them behind as readily as
he did his debts, if so weighty a description
may be given to his volatile engagements.
He did not discharge these engagements;
he elongated himself from them; between
himself and a query he interposed distance,
and at once that became foreign to him, for
half a mile about himself was his frontier,
and beyond that, wherever he was, the
enemy lay.</p>

<p class="indent">He stood outside of every social relation,
and within an organised humanity he might
almost have been reckoned as a different
species. He was very mobile, but all his
freedom lay in one direction, and outside of
that pasturage he could never go. For the
average man there are two dimensions of
space wherein he moves with a certain
limited freedom; it is for him a horizontal
and a perpendicular world; he goes up the
social scale and down it, and in both these
atmospheres there is a level wherein he can
exercise himself to and fro, his journeyings
being strictly limited by his business and his
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page56" id="page56"></a>[pg 56]</span>
family. Between the place where he works
and the place where he lives lies all the freedom
he can hope for; within that range he
must seek such adventures as he craves,
and the sole expansion to which he can attain
is upwards towards another social life
if he be ambitious, or downward to the underworlds
if he is bored. For Mac Cann there
was no upward and no downward movements,
he had plumbed to the very rocks of
life, but his horizontal movements were
bounded only by the oceans around his
country, and in this gigantic underworld he
moved with almost absolute freedom, and a
knowledge which might properly be termed
scientific.</p>

<p class="indent">In despite of his apparent outlawry he was
singularly secure; ambition waved no littlest
lamp at him; the one ill which could overtake
him was death, which catches on every
man; no enmity could pursue him to any
wall, for he was sunken a whole sphere
beneath malice as beneath benevolence.
Physical ill-treatment might come upon
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page57" id="page57"></a>[pg 57]</span>
him, but in that case it was his manhood and
his muscle against another manhood and
another muscle—the simplest best would
win, but there was no glory for the conqueror
nor any loot to be carried from the
battle.</p>

<p class="indent">Casual warfares, such as these, had been
frequent enough in his career, for he had
fought stubbornly with every kind of man,
and had afterwards medicined his wounds
with the only unguents cheap enough for
his usage—the healing balsams of time and
patience. He had but one occupation, and
it was an engrossing one—he hunted for
food, and for it he hunted with the skill and
pertinacity of a wolf or a vulture.</p>

<p class="indent">With what skill he did hunt! He would
pick crumbs from the lank chaps of famine;
he gathered nourishment from the empty air;
he lifted it from wells and watercourses; he
picked it off clothes lines and hedges; he
stole so cleverly from the bees that they
never felt his hand in their pocket; he
would lift the eggs from beneath a bird, and
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page58" id="page58"></a>[pg 58]</span>
she would think that his finger was a chicken;
he would clutch a hen from the roost, and
the housewife would think he was the yard
dog, and the yard dog would think he was
its brother.</p>

<p class="indent">He had a culture too, and if it was not
wide it was profound; he knew wind and
weather as few astronomers know it; he
knew the habit of the trees and the earth;
how the seasons moved, not as seasons, but
as days and hours; he had gathered all the
sweets of summer, and the last rigour of
winter was no secret to him; he had fought
with the winter every year of his life as one
fights with a mad beast, he had held off
that grizzliest of muzzles and escaped
scatheless.</p>

<p class="indent">He knew men and women, and he knew
them from an angle at which they seldom
caught themselves or each other; he knew
them as prey to be bitten and escaped from
quickly. At them, charged with a thousand
preoccupations, he looked with an eye in
which there was a single surmise, and he
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page59" id="page59"></a>[pg 59]</span>
divined them in a flash. In this quick
vision he saw man, one expression, one
attitude for all; never did he see a man or
woman in their fullness, his microscopic
vision caught only what it looked for, but
he saw that with the instant clarity of the
microscope. There were no complexities
for him in humanity; there were those
who gave and those who did not give;
there were those who might be cajoled, and
those who might be frightened. If there
was goodness in a man he glimpsed it
from afar as a hawk sees a mouse in the
clover, and he swooped on that virtue and
was away with booty. If there was evil in a
man he passed it serenely as a sheep passes
by a butcher, for evil did not affect him.
Evil could never put a hand on him, and
he was not evil himself.</p>

<p class="indent">If the denominations of virtue or vice
must be affixed to his innocent existence,
then these terms would have to be re-defined,
for they had no meaning in his case; he
stood outside these as he did outside of
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page60" id="page60"></a>[pg 60]</span>
the social structure. But, indeed, he was
not outside of the social structure at all;
he was so far inside of it that he could
never get out; he was at the very heart of
it; he was held in it like a deer in an ornamental
park, or a cork that bobs peacefully
in a bucket, and in the immense, neglected
pastures of civilisation he found his own
quietude and his own wisdom.</p>

<p class="indent">All of the things he knew and all of the
things that he had done were most competently
understood by his daughter.</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page61" id="page61"></a>[pg 61]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER X</h2>

<p class="indent">It is to be remarked that the angels were
strangely like Patsy Mac Cann. Their ideas
of right and wrong almost entirely coincided
with his. They had no property and so
they had no prejudices, for the person who
has nothing may look upon the world as his
inheritance, while the person who has something
has seldom anything but that.</p>

<p class="indent">Civilisation, having built itself at hazard
upon the Rights of Property, has sought on
many occasions to unbuild itself again in
sheer desperation of any advance, but from
the great Ethic of Possession there never has
been any escape, and there never will be
until the solidarity of man has been really
created, and until each man ceases to see
the wolf in his neighbour.</p>

<p class="indent">Is there actually a wolf in our neighbour?
We see that which we are, and our eyes project
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page62" id="page62"></a>[pg 62]</span>
on every side an image of ourselves; if
we look with fear that which we behold is
frightful; if we look with love then the
colours of heaven are repeated to us from the
ditch and the dungeon. We invent eternally
upon one another; we scatter our sins
broadcast and call them our neighbours;
let us scatter our virtues abroad and build
us a city to live in.</p>

<p class="indent">For Mac Cann and his daughter there
was no longer any strangeness in their companions.
As day and night succeeded, as
conversation and action supplemented each
other on their journeys, so each of them began
to unfold from the fleshy disguise, and
in a short time they could each have spoken
of the others to an inquiring stranger, giving,
within bounds, reasonably exact information
as to habit and mentality.</p>

<p class="indent">What conversations they had engaged in!
Sitting now by a hedge close to a tiny chaotic
village, compact of ugliness and stupidity,
now at twilight as they camped in a
disused quarry, leaning their shoulders
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page63" id="page63"></a>[pg 63]</span>
against great splintered rocks, and hearing
no sound but the magnified, slow trickle of
water and the breeze that sung or screamed
against a razor edge of rock; or lying on the
sheltered side of a pit of potatoes, they
stared at the moon as she sailed on her
lonely voyages, or watched the stars that
glanced and shone from the drifting clouds;
and as they lifted their eyes to these sacred
voyagers in whose charge is the destiny of
man they lifted their minds also and adored
mutely that mind of which these are the
thoughts made visible.</p>

<p class="indent">Sometimes they discussed the problems
of man in a thousand superficial relationships.
The angels were wise, but in the
vocabulary which they had to use wisdom
had no terms. Their wisdom referred only
to ultimates, and was the unhandiest of tools
when dug into some immediate, curious
problem. Before wisdom can be audible a
new language must be invented, and they
also had to unshape their definitions and
re-translate these secular findings into terms
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page64" id="page64"></a>[pg 64]</span>
wherein they could see the subject broadly,
and they found that what they gained in
breadth they lost in outline, and that the
last generalisation, however logically it was
framed, was seldom more than an intensely
interesting lie when it was dissected again.
No truth in regard to space and time can
retain virtue for longer than the beating of
an artery; it too has its succession, its
sidereal tide, and while you look upon it,
round and hardy as a pebble, behold, it is
split and fissured and transformed.</p>

<p class="indent">Sometimes when it rained, and it rained
often, they would seek refuge in a haystack,
if one was handy; or they would creep into
a barn and hide behind hills of cabbages or
piles of farming tools; or they slid into the
sheds among the cattle where they warmed
and fed themselves against those peaceful
flanks; or, if they were nigh a town and had
been lucky that day, they would pay a few
coppers to sleep on the well-trodden, earthen
floor of a house.</p>

<p class="indent">As for the ass, he slept wherever he could.
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page65" id="page65"></a>[pg 65]</span>
When there was rain he would stand with his
tail against the wind sunken in a reverie so
profound that he no longer seemed to feel
the rain or the wind. From these abysses
of thought he would emerge to the realisation
that there was a sheltered side to a
wall or a clump of heather, and he also
would take his timely rest under the stars
of God.</p>

<p class="indent">What did they say to him? Down the
glittering slopes they peer and nod; before
his eyes the mighty pageant is unrolled in
quiet splendour; for him too the signs are
set. Does the Waterman care nothing for
his thirst? Does the Ram not bless his
increase? Against his enemies also the
Archer will bend his azure bow and loose
his arrows of burning gold.</p>

<p class="indent">On their journeyings they met with many
people; not the folk who lived in the
houses dotted here and there at great distances
from each other on the curving
roads, for with these people they had nothing
to do, they had scarcely anything to
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page66" id="page66"></a>[pg 66]</span>
say, and the housefolk looked on the
strollers with a suspicion which was almost
a fear. The language of these was seldom
gracious, and often, on their approach, the
man of the house was sent for and the dog
was unchained.</p>

<p class="indent">But for the vagabonds these people did
not count; Mac Cann and his daughter
scarcely looked on them as human beings,
and if he had generalised about them at
all, he would have said that there was no
difference between these folk and the trees
that shaded their dwellings in leafy spray,
that they were rooted in their houses, and
that they had no idea of life other than the
trees might have which snuff for ever the
same atmosphere and look on the same
horizon until they droop again to the clay
they lifted from.</p>

<p class="indent">It was with quite other people they communed.</p>

<p class="indent">The wandering ballad singer with his
wallet of songs slung at his ragged haunch;
the travelling musician whose blotchy fiddle
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page67" id="page67"></a>[pg 67]</span>
could sneeze out the ten strange tunes he
had learned from his father and from his
father's generations before him; the little
band travelling the world carrying saplings
and rushes from the stream which they
wove cunningly into tables and chairs
warranted not to last too long; the folk
who sold rootless ferns to people from whose
window-ledges they had previously stolen
the pots to plant them in; the men who
went roaring along the roads driving the
cattle before them from fair to market and
back again; the hairy tinkers with their
clattering metals, who marched in the
angriest of battalions and who spoke a
language composed entirely of curses.</p>

<p class="indent">These, and an hundred varieties of these,
they met and camped with and were friendly
with, and to the angels these people were
humanity, and the others were, they did not
know what.</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page68" id="page68"></a>[pg 68]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER XI</h2>

<p class="indent">It might be asked why Patsy Mac Cann
permitted the strangers to remain with him.</p>

<p class="indent">Now that they were dressed like himself
he had quite forgotten, or he never thought
of their celestial character, and they were
undoubtedly a burden upon his ingenuity.
They ate as vigorously as he did, and the
food which they ate he had to supply.</p>

<p class="indent">There were two reasons for this kindliness—He
had always wished to be the leader of
a troop. In his soul the Ancient Patriarch
was alive and ambitious of leadership. Had
his wife given him more children he would
have formed them and their wives and
children into a band, and the affairs of this
little world would have been directed by
him with pride and pleasure. He would
have observed their goings-out and their
comings-in; he would have apportioned
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page69" id="page69"></a>[pg 69]</span>
praise and reproach to his little clann; he
would have instructed them upon a multitude
of things, and passed on to them the
culture which he had gathered so hardily,
and, when they arrived at the age of ingenuity,
it would have still been his ambition
to dash their arguments with his
superior knowledge, or put the happy
finish to any plan which they submitted for
his approval; he would have taken the
road, like a prince of old, with his tail, and
he would have undertaken such raids and
forays that his name and fame would ring
through the underworld like the note of a
trumpet.</p>

<p class="indent">He could not do this because he only
had one child (the others had died wintry
deaths) and she was a girl. But now heaven
itself had blessed him with a following and
he led it with skill and enjoyment. Furthermore,
his daughter, of whom he stood in
considerable awe, had refused flatly to desert
the strangers whom Providence had directed
to them.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page70" id="page70"></a>[pg 70]</span>
She had constituted herself in some
strange way the mother of the four men.
She cooked for them, she washed and
mended for them, and, when the necessity
arose, she scolded them with the heartiest
good-will.</p>

<p class="indent">Her childhood had known nothing of dolls,
and so her youth made dolls of these men
whom she dressed and fed. Sometimes her
existence with them was peaceful and happy;
at other times she almost went mad with
jealous rage. Little by little she began to
demand a domestic obedience which they
very willingly gave her; so they were her
men and no one else's, and the exercise of
this power gave her a delight such as she
had never known.</p>

<p class="indent">She was wise also, for it was only in domestic
affairs that she claimed their fealty;
with their masculine movements she did
not interfere, nor did she interfere with the
task and apportioning of the day, although
her counsel was willingly listened to in these
matters; but when night came, when the
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page71" id="page71"></a>[pg 71]</span>
camp was selected, the little cart unloaded,
and the brazier lit, then she stepped briskly
to her kingdom and ruled like a chieftainess.</p>

<p class="indent">With her father she often had trouble:
he would capitulate at the end, but not until
he had set forth at length his distaste for her
suggestions and his assurance that she was a
strap. She seldom treated him as a father,
for she seldom remembered that relationship;
she loved him as one loves a younger
brother, and she was angry with him as one
can only be angry with a younger brother.
Usually she treated him as an infant; she
adored him, and, if he had permitted it, she
would have beaten him soundly on many
an occasion.</p>

<p class="indent">For she was a strong girl. She was big in
build and bone, and she was beautiful and
fearless. Framed in a rusty shawl her face
leaped out instant and catching as a torch in
darkness; under her clumsy garments one
divined a body to be adored as a revelation;
she walked carelessly as the wind walks,
proudly as a young queen trained in
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page72" id="page72"></a>[pg 72]</span>
grandeur. She could leap from where she
stood, as a wild-cat that springs terribly
from quietude; she could run as a deer
runs, and pause at full flight like a carven
statue. Each movement of hers was complete
and lovely in itself; when she lifted a
hand to her hair the free attitude was a
marvel of composure; it might never have
begun, and might never cease, it was solitary
and perfect; when she bent to the
brazier she folded to such an economy of
content that one might have thought her
half her size and yet perfect; she had that
beauty which raises the mind of man to an
ecstasy which is murderous if it be not
artistic; and she was so conscious of her
loveliness that she could afford to forget it,
and so careless that she had never yet used
it as a weapon or a plea.</p>

<p class="indent">She could not but be aware of her beauty,
for her mirrors had tongues; they were the
eyes of those she met and paused with. No
man had yet said anything to her, saving in
rough jest as to a child, but no woman could
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page73" id="page73"></a>[pg 73]</span>
speak of anything else in her presence, and
these exclamations drummed through all
their talk.</p>

<p class="indent">She had been worshipped by many women,
for to physical loveliness in their own sex
women are the veriest slaves. They will love
a man for his beauty, but a woman they will
adore as a singularity, as something almost
too good to be true, as something which may
vanish even while they gaze at it. Prettiness
they understand and like or antagonise,
but they have credited beauty as a
masculine trait; and as a race long sunken
in slavery, and who look almost despairingly
for a saviour, so the female consciousness
prostrates itself before female beauty
as before a messiah who will lead them to
the unconscious horrible ambitions which
are the goal of femininity. But, and it is
humanity's guard against a solitary development,
while women worship a beautiful
woman the beauty does not care for them;
she accepts their homage and flies them as
one flies from the deadliest boredom; she
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page74" id="page74"></a>[pg 74]</span>
is the widest swing of their pendulum, and
must hurry again from the circumference
to the centre with the violent speed of an
outcast who sees from afar the smoke of his
father's house and the sacred roof-tree.</p>

<p class="indent">There is a steadying influence; an irreconcilable
desire and ambition; the desire
of every woman to be the wife of a fool, her
ambition to be the mother of a genius; but
they postulate genius, it is their outlet and
their justification for that leap at a tangent
which they have already taken.</p>

<p class="indent">Out there they have discovered the
Neuter. Is the Genius always to be born
from an unfertilised womb, or rather a
self-fertilised one? Singular Messiahs!
scorners of paternity! claiming no less
than the Cosmos for a father; taking from
the solitary mother capacity for infinite
suffering and infinite love, whence did ye
gather the rough masculine intellect, the
single eye, all that hardiness of courage and
sensibility of self that made of your souls a
battlefield, and of your memory a terror to
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page75" id="page75"></a>[pg 75]</span>
drown love under torrents of horrid red!
Deluded so far and mocked! No genius has
yet sprung from ye but the Genius of War
and Destruction, those frowning captains
that have ravaged our vineyards and blackened
our generations with the torches of
their egotism.</p>

<p class="indent">To woman beauty is energy, and they
would gladly take from their own sex that
which they have so long accepted from man.
They are economical; the ants and the bees
are not more amazingly parsimonious than
they, and, like the ants and the bees, their
subsequent extravagance is a thing to
marvel at. Food and children they will
hoard, and when these are safeguarded their
attitude to the life about them is ruinous.
They will adorn themselves at the expense
of all creation, and in a few years they crush
from teeming life a species which nature
has toiled through laborious ages to perfect.
They adorn themselves, and too
often adornment is the chief manifestation
of boredom. They are world-weary, sex-weary,
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page76" id="page76"></a>[pg 76]</span>
and they do not know what they
want; but they want power, so that
they may rule evolution once more as long
ago they ruled it; their blood remembers an
ancient greatness; they crave to be the
queens again, to hold the sceptre of life in
their cruel hands, to break up the mould
which has grown too rigid for freedom, to
form anew the chaos which is a womb, and
which they conceive is their womb, and to
create therein beauty and freedom and
power. But the king whom they have
placed on the throne has grown wise in
watching them; he is their bone terribly
separated, terribly endowed; he uses their
cruelty, their fierceness, as his armies against
them—and so the battle is set, and wild
deeds may flare from the stars of rebellion
and prophecy.</p>

<p class="indent">Mary, who could make women do anything
for her, was entirely interested in
making men bow to her will, and because,
almost against her expectation they did
bow, she loved them, and could not sacrifice
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page77" id="page77"></a>[pg 77]</span>
herself too much for their comfort or
even their caprice. It was the mother-spirit
in her which, observing the obedience
of her children, is forced in very gratitude
to become their slave; for, beyond all
things, a woman desires power, and, beyond
all things, she is unable to use it
when she gets it. If this power be given to
her grudgingly she will exercise it mercilessly;
if it is given kindly then she is
bound by her nature to renounce authority,
and to live happy ever after, but it must be
given to her.</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page78" id="page78"></a>[pg 78]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER XII</h2>

<p class="indent">It may be surprising to learn that the
names of the angels were Irish names, but
more than eight hundred years ago a
famous Saint informed the world that the
language spoken in heaven was Gaelic, and,
presumably, he had information on the
point. He was not an Irishman, and he had
no reason to exalt Fodhla above the other
nations of the earth, and, therefore, his
statement may be accepted on its merits,
the more particularly as no other saint has
denied it, and every Irish person is prepared
to credit it.</p>

<p class="indent">It was also believed in ancient times, and
the belief was world-wide, that the entrance
to heaven, hell, and purgatory yawned in
the Isle of the Saints, and this belief also,
although it has never been proved, has
never been disproved, and it does assist the
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page79" id="page79"></a>[pg 79]</span>
theory that Irish is the celestial language.
Furthermore, Gaelic is the most beautiful
and expressive fashion of speech in
the whole world, and, thus, an artistic and
utilitarian reinforcement can be hurried
to the support of that theory should it
ever be in danger from philologists with
foreign axes to grind.</p>

<p class="indent">The names of the angels were Finaun and
Caeltia and Art.</p>

<p class="indent">Finaun was the eldest angel; Caeltia was
that one who had a small coal-black beard
on his chin, and Art was the youngest of
the three, and he was as beautiful as the
dawn, than which there is nothing more
beautiful.</p>

<p class="indent">Finaun was an Archangel when he was in
his own place; Caeltia was a Seraph, and
Art was a Cherub. An Archangel is a
Councillor and a Guardian; a Seraph is
one who accumulates knowledge; a Cherub
is one who accumulates love. In heaven
these were their denominations.</p>

<p class="indent">Finaun was wise, childish, and kind, and
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page80" id="page80"></a>[pg 80]</span>
between him and the little ass which drew
their cart there was a singular and very
pleasant resemblance.</p>

<p class="indent">Caeltia was dark and determined, and if
he had cropped his beard with a scissors, the
way Patsy Mac Cann did, he would have
resembled Patsy Mac Cann as closely as
one man can resemble another.</p>

<p class="indent">Art was dark also, and young and swift
and beautiful. Looking carelessly at him
one would have said that, barring the colour,
he was the brother of Mary Mac Cann, and
that the two of them were born at a birth,
and a good birth.</p>

<p class="indent">Mary extended to Finaun part of the
affection which she already had for the ass,
and while they were marching the roads
these three always went together; the
archangel would be on one side of the
donkey and Mary would be on the other
side, and (one may say so) the three of
them never ceased talking for an instant.</p>

<p class="indent">The ass, it will be admitted, did not speak,
but he listened with such evident intention
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page81" id="page81"></a>[pg 81]</span>
that no one could say he was out of the conversation;
his right-hand ear hearkened
agilely to Mary; his left-hand ear sprang
to attention when Finaun spoke, and when,
by a chance, they happened to be silent
at the one moment then both his ears
drooped forward towards his nose, and
so he was silent also. A hand from either
side continually touched his muzzle caressingly,
and at moments entirely unexpected
he would bray affectionately at them in a
voice that would have tormented the ears
of any but a true friend.</p>

<p class="indent">Patsy Mac Cann and the seraph Caeltia
used to march exactly at the tail of the
cart, and they, also, talked a lot.</p>

<p class="indent">At first Patsy talked the most, for he had
much information to impart, and the seraph
listened with intent humility, but, after a
while, Caeltia, having captured knowledge,
would dispute and argue with great vivacity.
They spoke of many things, but a person who
listened closely and recorded these things
would have found that they talked oftener
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page82" id="page82"></a>[pg 82]</span>
about strong drinks than about anything
else. Mac Cann used to speak longingly
about strange waters which he had heard
were brewed in foreign lands, potent brewings
which had been described to him by
emphatic sailormen with tarry thumbs;
but at this stage Caeltia only spoke about
porter and whisky, and was well contented
to talk of these.</p>

<p class="indent">The cherub Art was used to promenade
alone behind them all, but sometimes he
would go in front and listen to the conversation
with the ass; sometimes he would join
the two behind and force them to consider
matters in which they were not interested,
and sometimes again he would range the
fields on either side, or he would climb a
tree, or he would go alone by himself shouting
a loud song that he had learned at the
fair which they had last journeyed to, or
he would prance silently along the road as
though his body was full of jumps and he did
not know what to do with them, or he would
trudge forlornly in a boredom so profound
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page83" id="page83"></a>[pg 83]</span>
that one expected him to drop dead of it in
his tracks.</p>

<p class="indent">So life fell into a sort of routine.</p>

<p class="indent">When they were camped for the night
Caeltia and Art would always sit on one side
of the brazier with Patsy Mac Cann sitting
between them; on the other side of the
brazier the archangel and Mary would sit;
Finaun always sat very close to her when
they had finished eating and were all talking
together; he used to take her long plait
of hair into his lap, and for a long time he
would unplait and plait again the end of that
lovely rope.</p>

<p class="indent">Mary liked him to do this, and nobody
else minded it.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page85" id="page85"></a>[pg 85]</span></p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="center"><a name="bk2" id="bk2"></a>BOOK II</p>

<p class="center">EILEEN NI COOLEY</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page87" id="page87"></a>[pg 87]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER XIII</h2>

<p class="indent">Early in the morning the sun had been
shining gloriously, and there was a thump of
a wind blowing across the road that kept
everything gay; the trees were in full leaf
and every bough went jigging to its neighbour,
but on the sky the clouds raced so
fast that they were continually catching
each other up and getting so mixed that they
could not disentangle themselves again,
and from their excessive gaiety black misery
spread and the sun took a gloomy cast.</p>

<p class="indent">Mac Cann screwed an eye upwards like a
bird and rubbed at his chin.</p>

<p class="indent">"There will be rain soon," said he, "and
the country wants it."</p>

<p class="indent">"It will be heavy rain," said his daughter.</p>

<p class="indent">"It will so," he replied; "let us be
getting along now the way we'll be somewhere
before the rain comes, for I never did
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page88" id="page88"></a>[pg 88]</span>
like getting wetted by rain, and nobody ever
did except the people of the County Cork,
and they are so used to it that they never
know whether it's raining or whether it
isn't."</p>

<p class="indent">So they encouraged the ass to go quicker
and he did that.</p>

<p class="indent">As they hastened along the road they saw
in front of them two people marching close
together, and in a little time they drew close
to these people.</p>

<p class="indent">"I know the look of that man's back,"
said Patsy, "but I can't tell you where I saw
it. I've a good memory for faces, though,
and I'll tell you all about him in a minute."</p>

<p class="indent">"Do you know the woman that is with
him?" said Caeltia.</p>

<p class="indent">"You can't tell a woman by her back,"
replied Patsy, "and nobody could, for they
all have the same back when they have a
shawl on."</p>

<p class="indent">Mary turned her head to them:</p>

<p class="indent">"Every woman's back is different," said
she, "whether there's a shawl on it or not,
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page89" id="page89"></a>[pg 89]</span>
and I know from the way that woman is
wearing her shawl that she is Eileen Ni
Cooley and no one else."</p>

<p class="indent">"If that is so," said her father hastily,
"let us be going slower the way we won't
catch up on her. Mary, a grah, whisper a
word in the ass's ear so that he won't be
going so quick, for he is full of fun this
day."</p>

<p class="indent">"I'll do that," said Mary, and she said
"whoa" into the ear of the little ass, and he
stopped inside the quarter of a pace.</p>

<p class="indent">"Do you not like that woman?" Caeltia
enquired.</p>

<p class="indent">"She's a bad woman," replied Patsy.</p>

<p class="indent">"What sort of a bad woman is she?"</p>

<p class="indent">"She's the sort that commits adultery
with every kind of man," said he harshly.</p>

<p class="indent">Caeltia turned over that accusation for a
moment.</p>

<p class="indent">"Did she ever commit adultery with
yourself?" said he.</p>

<p class="indent">"She did not," said Patsy, "and that's
why I don't like her."</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page90" id="page90"></a>[pg 90]</span>
Caeltia considered that statement also,
and found it reasonable:</p>

<p class="indent">"I think," said he, "that the reason you
don't like that woman is because you like
her too much."</p>

<p class="indent">"It's so," said Patsy, "but there is no
reason for her taking on with every kind of
man and not taking on with me at all."</p>

<p class="indent">He was silent for a moment.</p>

<p class="indent">"I tell you," said he furiously, "that I
made love to that woman from the dawn to
the dark, and then she walked off with a
man that came down a little road."</p>

<p class="indent">"That was her right," said Caeltia mildly.</p>

<p class="indent">"Maybe it was, but for the weight of a
straw I would have killed the pair of them
that night in the dark place."</p>

<p class="indent">"Why didn't you?"</p>

<p class="indent">"She had me weakened. My knees gave
under me when she walked away and there
wasn't even a curse in my mouth."</p>

<p class="indent">Again he was silent, and again he broke
into angry speech!</p>

<p class="indent">"I don't want to see her at all, for she
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page91" id="page91"></a>[pg 91]</span>
torments me, so let the pair of them walk
their road until they come to a ditch that
is full of thorns and is fit for them to die
in."</p>

<p class="indent">"I think," said Caeltia, "that the reason
you don't want to see her is because you
want to see her too much."</p>

<p class="indent">"It's so," growled Mac Cann, "and it's so
too that you are a prying kind of a man and
that your mouth is never at rest, so we'll go
on now to the woman yonder, and let you
talk to her with your tongue and your
nimble questions."</p>

<p class="indent">Thereupon he rushed forward and kicked
the ass so suddenly in the belly that it leaped
straight off the ground and began to run
before its legs touched earth again.</p>

<p class="indent">When they had taken a few dozen steps
Mac Cann began to roar furiously:</p>

<p class="indent">"What way are you, Eileen Ni Cooley?
What sort of a man is it that's walking
beside yourself?"</p>

<p class="indent">And he continued roaring questions such
as that until they drew on the people.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page92" id="page92"></a>[pg 92]</span>
The folk stopped at his shouts.</p>

<p class="indent">The woman was big and thin and she had
red hair. Her face was freckled all over so
that one could only see her delicate complexion
in little spots, and at the first glance
the resemblance between herself and Finaun
was extraordinary. In the sweep of the
brow, the set of the cheek-bones, a regard
of the eyes, that resemblance was seen, and
then the look vanished in a poise of the head
and came again in another one.</p>

<p class="indent">At the moment her blue eyes seemed the
angriest that ever were in a woman's head.
She stood leaning on a thick ash-plant and
watched the advancing company, but she
did not utter a word to them.</p>

<p class="indent">The man by her side was tall also and as
thin as a pole; he was ramshackle and
slovenly; there was not much pith in his
body, for he was weak at the knees and his
big feet splayed outwards at a curious angle;
but his face was extraordinary intelligent,
and when he was younger must have
been beautiful. Drink and ill-health had
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page93" id="page93"></a>[pg 93]</span>
dragged and carved his flesh, and nothing of
comeliness remained to him but his eyes,
which were timid and tender as those of a
fawn, and his hands which had never done
anything but fumble with women. He also
leaned quietly on a cudgel and watched
Patsy Mac Cann.</p>

<p class="indent">And it was to him that Patsy came. He
did not look once at the woman, though all
the time he never ceased shouting salutations
and questions at her by her name.</p>

<p class="indent">He walked directly to the man, eyeing
him intently.</p>

<p class="indent">"And how is yourself?" he roared with
horrible heartiness. "It's a while since I
saw you, and it was the pitch night that
time."</p>

<p class="indent">"I'm all right," said the man.</p>

<p class="indent">"So you are," said Patsy, "and why
wouldn't you be? Weren't you born in the
wide lap of good luck, and didn't you stay
there? Ah, it's the way that the men that
come down little, narrow paths do have
fortune, and the ones that tramp the wide
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page94" id="page94"></a>[pg 94]</span>
roads do have nothing but their broken
feet. Good luck to you, my soul, and long
may you wave—Eh!"</p>

<p class="indent">"I didn't say a word," said the man.</p>

<p class="indent">"And there's a stick in your hand that
would crack the skull of a mountain, let
alone a man."</p>

<p class="indent">"It's a good stick," said the man.</p>

<p class="indent">"Would you be calling it the brother or
the husband of the one that the woman has
in her happy hands."</p>

<p class="indent">"I would be calling it a stick only,"
replied the man.</p>

<p class="indent">"That's the name for it surely," said
Patsy, "for a stick hasn't got a soul any
more than a woman has, and isn't that a
great mercy and a great comfort, for
heaven would be full of women and wood,
and there would be no room for the men
and the drink."</p>

<p class="indent">The red-haired woman strode to Patsy
and, putting her hand against his breast,
she gave him a great push:</p>

<p class="indent">"If you're talking," said she, "or if
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page95" id="page95"></a>[pg 95]</span>
you're fighting, turn to myself, for the
man doesn't know you."</p>

<p class="indent">Patsy did turn to her with a great laugh:</p>

<p class="indent">"It's the one pleasure of my life to have
your hands on me," he gibed. "Give me
another puck now, and a hard one, the way
I'll feel you well."</p>

<p class="indent">The woman lifted her ash-plant threateningly
and crouched towards him, but the
look on his face was such that she let her
hand fall again.</p>

<p class="indent">"You're full of fun," said Patsy, "and
you always were, but we're going to be
the great friends from now on, yourself
and myself and the man with the stick;
we'll be going by short cuts everywhere
in the world, and having a gay time."</p>

<p class="indent">"We're not going with you, Padraig,"
said the woman, "and whatever road you
are taking this day the man and myself
will be going another road."</p>

<p class="indent">"Whoo!" said Patsy, "there are roads
everywhere, so you're all right, and there
are men on every one of the roads."</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page96" id="page96"></a>[pg 96]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER XIV</h2>

<p class="indent">While this conversation had been taking
place the others stood in a grave semicircle,
and listened intently to their words.</p>

<p class="indent">Caeltia, regarding the sky, intervened:</p>

<p class="indent">"The rain will be here in a minute, so
we had better walk on and look for shelter."</p>

<p class="indent">Mac Cann detached his heavy regard
from Eileen Ni Cooley, and swept the sky
and the horizon.</p>

<p class="indent">"That is so," said he. "Let us go ahead
now, for we've had our talk, and we are all
satisfied."</p>

<p class="indent">"There is a broken-down house stuck
up a bohereen," he continued. "It's only
a few perches up this road, for I remember
passing the place the last time I was this
way; that place will give us shelter while
the rain spills."</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page97" id="page97"></a>[pg 97]</span>
He turned his stubborn face to the
woman:</p>

<p class="indent">"You can come with us if you like, and
you can stay where you are if you like, or
you can go to the devil," and, saying so,
he tramped after his daughter.</p>

<p class="indent">The woman had just caught sight of
Art the cherub, and was regarding him
with her steady eyes.</p>

<p class="indent">"Whoo!" said she, "I'm not the one
to be frightened and I never was, so let
us all go along and talk about our sins
in the wet weather."</p>

<p class="indent">They started anew on the road, Patsy's
company in advance, and behind marched
the woman and the man and Art the
cherub.</p>

<p class="indent">The sun had disappeared; wild clouds
were piling themselves in rugged hills
along the sky, and the world was growing
dull and chill. Against the grey atmosphere
Art's face was in profile, an outline
sharp and calm and beautiful.</p>

<p class="indent">Eileen Ni Cooley was regarding him
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page98" id="page98"></a>[pg 98]</span>
curiously as they walked together, and the
strange man, with a wry smile on his lips,
was regarding her with a like curiosity.</p>

<p class="indent">She pointed towards Patsy Mac Cann,
who was tramping vigorously a dozen yards
ahead.</p>

<p class="indent">"Young boy," said she, "where did you
pick up with the man yonder, for the pair
of you don't look matched?"</p>

<p class="indent">Art had his hands in his pockets; he
turned and looked at her tranquilly.</p>

<p class="indent">"Where did you pick up with that man,"
he nodded towards her companion, "and
where did the man pick up with you, for
you don't look matched either?"</p>

<p class="indent">"We're not," said the woman quickly;
"we're not matched a bit. That man and
myself do be quarrelling all day and all
night, and threatening to walk away from
each other every minute of the time."</p>

<p class="indent">The man stared at her.</p>

<p class="indent">"Is that how it is with us?" said he.</p>

<p class="indent">"It is," said she to Art, "that's the way
it is with us, honey. The man and myself
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page99" id="page99"></a>[pg 99]</span>
have no love for each other now, and we
never had."</p>

<p class="indent">The man halted suddenly; he changed
the cudgel to his left hand and thrust out
his right hand to her.</p>

<p class="indent">"Put your own hand there," said he,
"and shake it well, and then be going along
your road."</p>

<p class="indent">"What are you talking about?" said
she.</p>

<p class="indent">He replied, frowning sternly from his
wild eyes:</p>

<p class="indent">"I wouldn't hold the grace of God if I
saw it slipping from me, so put your hand
into my hand and go along your road."</p>

<p class="indent">Eileen Ni Cooley put her hand into his
with some awkwardness and turned away
her head.</p>

<p class="indent">"There it is for you," said she.</p>

<p class="indent">Then the man turned about and flapped
quickly along the path they had already
travelled; his cudgel beat the ground
with a sharp noise, and he did not once
look back.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page100" id="page100"></a>[pg 100]</span>
Before he had taken an hundred paces
the rain came, a fine, noiseless drizzle.</p>

<p class="indent">"It will be heavy in a minute," said the
woman, "let us run after the cart."</p>

<p class="indent">With a quick movement she tucked her
shawl about her head and shoulders and
started to run, and Art went after her in
alternate long hops of each foot.</p>

<p class="indent">They had reached a narrow path running
diagonally from the main road.</p>

<p class="indent">"Up this way," shouted Patsy, and the
company trooped after him, leaving the
ass and cart to the storm.</p>

<p class="indent">Two minutes' distance up the road stood
a small, dismantled house. There was a
black gape where the window had been,
and there were holes in the walls. In
these holes grass and weeds were waving,
as they were along the window-ledge.
The roof was covered with a rusty thatch
and there were red poppies growing on
that.</p>

<p class="indent">Patsy climbed through the low window-space,
and the others climbed in after him.</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page101" id="page101"></a>[pg 101]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER XV</h2>

<p class="indent">Inside the house was an earthen floor,
four walls, and plenty of air. There were
breezes blowing in the empty house, for
from whatever direction a wind might
come it found entrance there. There were
stones lying everywhere on the floor; some
of them had dropped from the walls, but
most had been jerked through the window
by passing children. There were spider's
webs in that house; the roof was covered
with them, and the walls were covered
with them too. It was a dusty house,
and when it would be wet enough it would
be a muddy house, and it was musty with
disuse and desolation.</p>

<p class="indent">But the company did not care anything
about dust or stones or spiders. They
kicked the stones aside and sat on the floor
in the most sheltered part of the place
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page102" id="page102"></a>[pg 102]</span>
where there had once been a fireplace, and
if a spider walked on any of them it was
permitted.</p>

<p class="indent">Patsy produced a clay pipe and lit it,
and Caeltia took a silver-mounted briar
from his pocket and he lit that and smoked
it.</p>

<p class="indent">Outside the rain suddenly began to fall
with a low noise and the room grew dark.
Within there was a brooding quietness, for
none of the people spoke; they were all
waiting for each other to speak.</p>

<p class="indent">Indeed, they had all been agitated when
they came in, for the wrung face of Patsy
and the savage eyes of Eileen Ni Cooley
had whipped their blood. Tragedy had
sounded her warning note on the air, and
they were each waiting to see had they a
part in the play.</p>

<p class="indent">But the sudden change of atmosphere
wrought like a foreign chemical in their
blood, the sound of the falling rain dulled
their spirits, the must of that sleeping house
went to their brains like an opiate, and the
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page103" id="page103"></a>[pg 103]</span>
silence of the place folded them about,
compelling them to a similar quietude.</p>

<p class="indent">We are imitative beings; we respond to
the tone and colour of our environment
almost against ourselves, and still have our
links with the chameleon and the moth;
the sunset sheds its radiant peace upon
us and we are content; the silent mountain-top
lays a finger on our lips and we
talk in whispers; the clouds lend us of
their gaiety and we rejoice. So for a
few moments they sat wrestling with the
dull ghosts of that broken house, the
mournful phantasms that were not dead
long enough to be happy, for death is
sorrowful at first and for a long time, but
afterwards the dead are contented and
learn to shape themselves anew.</p>

<p class="indent">Patsy, drawing on his pipe, looked around
the people.</p>

<p class="indent">"Eh!" he exclaimed with heavy joviality,
"where has the man got to, the man with
the big stick? If he's shy let him come in,
and if he's angry let him come in too."</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page104" id="page104"></a>[pg 104]</span>
Eileen Ni Cooley was sitting close beside
Art. She had let her shawl droop from
her head, and her hair was showing through
the dusk like a torch.</p>

<p class="indent">"The man has gone away, Padraig," said
she; "he got tired of the company, and he's
gone travelling towards his own friends."</p>

<p class="indent">Patsy regarded her with shining eyes.
The must of the house was no longer in his
nostrils; the silence lifted from him at a
bound.</p>

<p class="indent">"You are telling me a fine story, Eileen,"
said he, "tell me this too, did the man go
away of his own will, or did you send him
away?"</p>

<p class="indent">"It was a bit of both, Padraig."</p>

<p class="indent">"The time to get good news," said Patsy,
"is when it's raining, and that is good
news, and it's raining now."</p>

<p class="indent">"News need not be good or bad, but
only news," she replied, "and we will leave
it at that."</p>

<p class="indent">Caeltia spoke to her:</p>

<p class="indent">"Do you have a good life going by yourself
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page105" id="page105"></a>[pg 105]</span>
about the country and making acquaintances
where you please?"</p>

<p class="indent">"I have the life I like," she answered,
"and whether it's good or bad doesn't
matter."</p>

<p class="indent">"Tell me the reason you never let himself
make love to you when he wants to
make it?"</p>

<p class="indent">"He is a domineering man," said she,
"and I am a proud woman, and we would
never give in to each other. When one of
us would want to do a thing the other one
wouldn't do it, and there would be no
living between us. If I said black he
would say white, and if he said yes I would
say no, and that's how we are."</p>

<p class="indent">"He has a great love for you."</p>

<p class="indent">"He has a great hate for me. He loves
me the way a dog loves bones, and in a little
while he'd kill me in a lonely place with his
hands to see what I would look like and I
dying."</p>

<p class="indent">She turned her face to Mac Cann:</p>

<p class="indent">"That's the kind of man you are to me,
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page106" id="page106"></a>[pg 106]</span>
Padraig, although you're different to other
people."</p>

<p class="indent">"I am not that sort of man, but it's
yourself is like that. I tell you that if I
took a woman with me I'd be staunch to
her the way I was with the mother of the
girl there, and if you were to come with me
you wouldn't have any complaint from
now on."</p>

<p class="indent">"I know every thing I'm talking about,"
she replied sternly, "and I won't go with
you, but I'll go with the young man here
beside me."</p>

<p class="indent">With the words she put her hand on
Art's arm and kept it there.</p>

<p class="indent">Mary Mac Cann straightened up where
she was sitting and became deeply interested.</p>

<p class="indent">Art turned and burst into a laugh as he
looked critically at Eileen.</p>

<p class="indent">"I will not go with you," said he. "I
don't care for you a bit."</p>

<p class="indent">She gave a hard smile and removed her
hand from his arm.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page107" id="page107"></a>[pg 107]</span>
"It's all the worse for me," said she,
"and it's small harm to you, young boy."</p>

<p class="indent">"That's a new answer for yourself,"
said Patsy, grinning savagely.</p>

<p class="indent">"It is, and it's a new day for me, and a
poor day, for it's the first day of my old
age."</p>

<p class="indent">"You'll die in a ditch," cried Patsy,
"you'll die in a ditch like an old mare with
a broken leg."</p>

<p class="indent">"I will," she snarled, "when the time
comes, but you'll never have the killing
of me, Padraig."</p>

<p class="indent">Finaun was sitting beside Mary with
her hand in his, but she snatched her hand
away and flared so fiercely upon Eileen
that the woman looked up.</p>

<p class="indent">"Don't be angry with me, Mary," said
she; "I never did you any harm yet and
I'll never be able to do it now, for there
are years between us, and they're going
to break my back."</p>

<p class="indent">Finaun was speaking, more, it seemed,
to himself than to the company. He
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page108" id="page108"></a>[pg 108]</span>
combed his white beard with his hand as
he spoke, and they all looked at him.</p>

<p class="indent">"He is talking in his sleep," said Eileen
pensively, "and he an old man, and a
nice old man."</p>

<p class="indent">"My father," said Caeltia, in an apologetic
voice; "there is no need to tell about
that."</p>

<p class="indent">"There is every need, my beloved,"
replied Finaun with his slow smile.</p>

<p class="indent">"I would rather you did not," murmured
Caeltia, lifting his hand a little.</p>

<p class="indent">"I ask your permission, my son," said
Finaun gently.</p>

<p class="indent">Caeltia spread out his open palms and
dropped them again.</p>

<p class="indent">"Whatever you wish to do is good, my
father," and, with a slight blush, he slid
the pipe into his pocket.</p>

<p class="indent">Finaun turned to Eileen Ni Cooley:</p>

<p class="indent">"I will tell you a story," said he.</p>

<p class="indent">"Sure," said Eileen, "I'd love to hear
you, and I could listen to a story for a day
and a night."</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page109" id="page109"></a>[pg 109]</span>
Mac Cann pulled solemnly at his pipe
and regarded Finaun who was looking at
him peacefully from a corner.</p>

<p class="indent">"You're full of fun," said he to the
archangel.</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page110" id="page110"></a>[pg 110]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER XVI</h2>

<p class="indent">Said Finaun:</p>

<p class="indent">"While generation succeeds generation
a man has to fight the same fight. At
the end he wins, and he never has to fight
that battle again, and then he is ready for
Paradise.</p>

<p class="indent">"Every man from the beginning has one
enemy from whom he can never escape,
and the story of his lives is the story of
his battles with that enemy whom he
must draw into his own being before he
can himself attain to real being, for an
enemy can never be crushed, but every
enemy can be won.</p>

<p class="indent">"Long before the foundations of this
world were laid, when the voice was heard
and the army of the voice went through
the darkness, two people came into being
with the universe that was their shell.
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page111" id="page111"></a>[pg 111]</span>
They lived through myriad existences
knowing star after star grow hot and cold
in the broad sky, and they hated each
other through the changing of the stars
and the ebbing and flooding of their lives.</p>

<p class="indent">"At a time this one of them would be a
woman and that other would be a man, and
again in due period the one that had been a
woman would be a man and the other
would be a woman, that their battle might
be joined in the intimacy which can only
come through difference and the distance
that is attraction.</p>

<p class="indent">"No one can say which of these did most
harm to the other; no one can say which
was the most ruthless, the most merciless,
for they were born, as all enemies are,
equal in being and in power.</p>

<p class="indent">"Through their lives they had many
names and they lived in many lands, but
their names in eternity were Finaun Mac
Dea and Caeltia Mac Dea, and when the
time comes, their name will be Mac
Dea and nothing else: then they will
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page112" id="page112"></a>[pg 112]</span>
become one in each other, and one in
Infinite Greatness, and one in the unending
life of Eternity which is God: but
still, in world under world, in star under
flaming star, they pursue each other with
a hate which is slowly changing into love.</p>

<p class="indent">"It was not on earth, nor in any planet,
that the beginning of love came to these
two, it was in the hell that they had
fashioned for themselves in terror and lust
and cruelty. For, as they sat among their
demons, a seed germinated in the soul of
one, the seed of knowledge which is the
parent of love and the parent of every
terrible and beautiful thing in the worlds
and the heavens.</p>

<p class="indent">"While that one looked on his companion,
writhing like himself in torment,
he grew conscious, and although he looked
at the other with fury it was with a
new fury, for with it came contempt, and
they were no longer equal in power or in
hate.</p>

<p class="indent">"Now, for the first time, that one in
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page113" id="page113"></a>[pg 113]</span>
whom knowledge had been born desired
to escape from his companion; he wished
to get away so that he might never behold
that enemy again; suddenly the other
appeared to him hideous as a toad that
couches in slime and spits his poison at
random, but he could not escape, and he
could never escape.</p>

<p class="indent">"As that one increased in knowledge so
he increased in cruelty and power, so his
lust became terrible, for now there was
fear in his contempt because he could never
escape. Many a time they fled from one
another, but always, and however they
fled, it was towards each other their steps
were directed. At the feast, in the camp,
and in the wilderness they found themselves
and undertook anew the quarrel
which was their blood and their being.</p>

<p class="indent">"And that other in whom knowledge
had not awakened—He raged like a beast;
he thought in blood and fever; his brains
were his teeth and the nails of his hands.
Cunning came creepingly to his aid against
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page114" id="page114"></a>[pg 114]</span>
knowledge; he lay in wait for his enemy
in gloomy places; he spread snares for
him in the darkness and baited traps.
He feigned humility to get closer to his
vengeance, but he could not combat
knowledge.</p>

<p class="indent">"Time and again he became the slave of
that other, and as slave and master their
battle was savagely joined, until at last
knowledge stirred also in that mind and
he grew conscious.</p>

<p class="indent">"Then the age-long enmity drew to its
change. For him there was no contempt
possible, the other was older than he and
wiser, for to be wise is to be old; there
was no vantage for contempt, but envy
sharpened his sword, it salted his anger,
and they fought anew and unceasingly.</p>

<p class="indent">"But now their hands were not seeking
each other's throats with such frank
urgency; they fought subterraneously, with
smiles and polite words and decent observances,
but they did not cease for an
instant to strive and never did they forsake
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page115" id="page115"></a>[pg 115]</span>
an advantage or lift up the one that
had fallen.</p>

<p class="indent">"Again the change: and now they
battled not in the name of hate but under
the holy superscription of love; again
and again, life after life, they harried and
ruined each other; their desire for one
another was a madness, and in that desire
they warred more bitterly than before.
They blasted each other's lives, they dashed
their honour to the mud, they slew one
another. Than this none of their battles
had been so terrible. Here there was no
let, no respite even for an instant. They
knew each other with that superficial
knowledge which seems so clear although
it shows no more than the scum floating
upon existence; they knew the scumminess
of each other and exhausted to the
dregs their abundant evil until of evil
they could learn no further, and their
lives, alternating in a fierce energy and a
miserable weariness, came towards but could
not come to stagnation.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page116" id="page116"></a>[pg 116]</span>
"The horizon vanished from them; there
were irons on the feet of the winds; the
sun peered from a hood through a mask,
and life was one room wherein dull voices
droned dully, wherein something was for
ever uttered and nothing was said, where
hands were for ever lifted and nothing
was done, where the mind smouldered and
flared to lightning and no thought came
from the spark.</p>

<p class="indent">"They had reached an end, and it was
a precipice down which they must spin
giddily to the murk, or else shape wings
for themselves and soar from that completion,
for completion is a consciousness,
and once again they were powerfully aware
of themselves. They were vice-conscious,
and virtue did not abide in their minds
than as a dream which was an illusion and
a lie.</p>

<p class="indent">"Then, and this too was long ago! how
long! When the moon was young; when
she gathered rosy clouds about her evening
and sang at noon from bush and mountain-ledge;
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page117" id="page117"></a>[pg 117]</span>
when she folded her breasts in dewy
darkness and awakened with cries of joy
to the sun; then she tended her flowers
in the vale; she drove her kine to deep
pasture: she sang to her multitudes of
increase and happiness while her feet went
in the furrow with the plough and her
hand guided the sickle and the sheaf.
Great love didst thou give when thou
wast a mother, O Beautiful! who art
now white as silver and hath ice upon thine
ancient head.</p>

<p class="indent">"Again they lived and were wed.</p>

<p class="indent">"Which of them was which in that sad
pilgrimage it is not now possible to know.
Memory faints at the long tale of it, and
they were so intermingled, so alike through
all their difference that they were becoming
one in the great memory. Again
they took up the time-long burden, and
again desire drew them wildly to the
embrace which was much repugnance and
very little love. So, behold these two, a
man and a woman, walking through the
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page118" id="page118"></a>[pg 118]</span>
pleasant light, taking each other's hands
in a kindness that had no roots, speaking
words of affection that their souls groaned
the lie to.</p>

<p class="indent">"The woman was fair—she was fair
as one star that shines on the void and is
not abashed before immensity; she was
beautiful as a green tree by a pool that
bows peacefully to the sun; she was
lovely as a field of mild corn waving to
the wind in one slow movement. Together
they plumbed their desire and found
wickedness glooming at the bottom, and
they were conscious of themselves and of
all evil.</p>

<p class="indent">"There was a demon in the pit that
they had digged, and always, when they
founded anew their hell, he tormented
them; he was the accumulation of their
evil; age after age they re-created him
until he showed gigantic and terrible as
a storm, and as they lusted after each
other so he lusted after them.</p>

<p class="indent">"On a time that Misery shaped itself
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page119" id="page119"></a>[pg 119]</span>
as a man and came privily to the woman
while she walked under heavy apple boughs
in a garden. Their feet went to and fro
closely together in the grass and their
voices communed together, until one day
the woman cried bitterly that there were
no wings, and with the Spectre she leaped
forthright to the chasm and went down
shrieking a laughter that was woe. There
she found herself and her demon and was
the concubine of that one; and there, in
the gulf and chasm of evil, she conjured
virtue to her tortured soul and stole energy
from the demon.</p>

<p class="indent">"She sat among the rocks of her place.</p>

<p class="indent">"Old Misery beside her laughed his
laugh, and while she looked at him her
eyes went backwards in her head, and
when she looked again she saw differently,
for in that space knowledge had put forth
a bud and a blossom and she looked through
knowledge. She saw herself and the demon
and the man, and she prayed to the demon.
As she prayed she gathered small blue
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page120" id="page120"></a>[pg 120]</span>
flowers that peered sparsely among the
crags, and she made a chaplet of these.
She wove them with tears and sighs, and
when the chaplet was made she put it
to the demon's hand, praying him to bear
it to the man.</p>

<p class="indent">"He did that for her because he loved
to laugh at their trouble, and he divined
laughter for his iron chaps.</p>

<p class="indent">"So the demon came terribly to the
man as he walked under the swaying and
lifting of green boughs in the long grass
of an orchard, and he put the chaplet in
the man's hand, saying:</p>

<p class="indent">"'My concubine, your beloved, sends a
greeting to you with her love and this
garland of blue flowers which she has
woven with her two hands in hell.'</p>

<p class="indent">"The man, looking on these flowers, felt
his heart move within him like water.</p>

<p class="indent">"'Bring her to me,' said he to the demon.</p>

<p class="indent">"'I will not do so,' replied the Misery.</p>

<p class="indent">"And, suddenly, the man leaped on the
Spectre. He locked his arms about that
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page121" id="page121"></a>[pg 121]</span>
cold neck, and clung furiously with his
knees.</p>

<p class="indent">"'Then I will go to her with you,' said he.</p>

<p class="indent">"And together they went headlong down
the pit, and as they fell they battled frightfully
in the dark pitch."</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page122" id="page122"></a>[pg 122]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER XVII</h2>

<p class="indent">Mac Cann was asleep, but when Finaun's
voice ceased he awakened and stretched
himself with a loud yawn.</p>

<p class="indent">"I didn't hear a word of that story,"
said he.</p>

<p class="indent">"I heard it," said Eileen Ni Cooley;
"it was a good story."</p>

<p class="indent">"What was it about?"</p>

<p class="indent">"I don't know," she replied.</p>

<p class="indent">"Do you know what it was about,
Mary?"</p>

<p class="indent">"I do not, for I was thinking about
other things at the time."</p>

<p class="indent">Finaun took her hand.</p>

<p class="indent">"There was no need for any of you to
know what that story was about, excepting
you only," and he looked very kindly at
Eileen Ni Cooley.</p>

<p class="indent">"I listened to it," said she; "and it
was a good story. I know what it was
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page123" id="page123"></a>[pg 123]</span>
about, but I would not know how to tell
what it was about."</p>

<p class="indent">"It must have been the queer yarn,"
said Patsy regretfully; "I wish I hadn't
gone to sleep."</p>

<p class="indent">"I was awake for you," said Caeltia.</p>

<p class="indent">"What's the use of that?" said Patsy
testily.</p>

<p class="indent">It was still raining.</p>

<p class="indent">The day was far advanced and evening
was spinning her dull webs athwart the
sky. Already in the broken house the
light had diminished to a brown gloom,
and their faces looked watchful and pale
to each other as they crouched on the
earthen floor. Silence was again seizing
on them, and each person's eyes were
focussing on some object or point on the
wall or the floor as their thoughts began
to hold them.</p>

<p class="indent">Mac Cann roused himself.</p>

<p class="indent">"We are here for the night; that rain
won't stop as long as there's a drop left
in its can."</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page124" id="page124"></a>[pg 124]</span>
Mary bestirred herself also.</p>

<p class="indent">"I'll slip down to the cart and bring
back whatever food is in it. I left every
thing covered and I don't think they'll
be too wet."</p>

<p class="indent">"Do that," said her father.</p>

<p class="indent">"There's a big bottle rolled up in a
sack," he continued; "it's in a bucket
at the front of the cart by the right shaft,
and there's a little sup of whisky in the
big bottle."</p>

<p class="indent">"I'll bring that too."</p>

<p class="indent">"You're a good girl," said he.</p>

<p class="indent">"What will I do with the ass this night?"
said Mary.</p>

<p class="indent">"Hit him a kick," said her father.</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page125" id="page125"></a>[pg 125]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER XVIII</h2>

<p class="indent">The ass stood quietly where he had been
left.</p>

<p class="indent">Rain was pouring from him as though he
were the father of rivers and supplied the
world with running water. It dashed off
his flanks; it leaped down his tail; it
foamed over his forehead to his nose, and
hit the ground from there with a thump.</p>

<p class="indent">"I'm very wet," said the ass to himself,
"and I wish I wasn't."</p>

<p class="indent">His eyes were fixed on a brown stone
that had a knob on its back. Every drop
of rain that hit the stone jumped twice
and then spattered to the ground. After
a moment he spoke to himself again:</p>

<p class="indent">"I don't care whether it stops raining
or not, for I can't be any wetter than I
am, however it goes."</p>

<p class="indent">Having said this, he dismissed the
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page126" id="page126"></a>[pg 126]</span>
weather and settled himself to think. He
hung his head slightly and fixed his eyes
afar off, and he stared distantly like that
without seeing anything while he gathered
and revolved his thoughts.</p>

<p class="indent">The first thing he thought about was
carrots.</p>

<p class="indent">He thought of their shape, their colour,
and the way they looked in a bucket.
Some would have the thick end stuck up,
and some would have the other end stuck
up, and there were always bits of clay
sticking to one end or the other. Some
would be lying on their sides as though
they had slipped quietly to sleep, and
some would be standing in a slanting way
as though they were leaning their backs
against a wall and couldn't make up their
minds what to do next. But, however
they looked in the bucket, they all tasted
alike, and they all tasted well. They are
a companionable food; they make a pleasant,
crunching noise when they are bitten,
and so, when one is eating carrots, one
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page127" id="page127"></a>[pg 127]</span>
can listen to the sound of one's eating and
make a story from it.</p>

<p class="indent">Thistles make a swishing noise when
they are bitten; they have their taste.</p>

<p class="indent">Grass does not make any noise at all; it
slips dumbly to the sepulchre, and makes
no sign.</p>

<p class="indent">Bread makes no sound when it is eaten
by an ass; it has an interesting taste, and
it clings about one's teeth for a long time.</p>

<p class="indent">Apples have a good smell and a joyful
crunch, but the taste of sugar lasts longer
in the mouth, and can be remembered for
longer than anything else; it has a short,
sharp crunch that is like a curse, and instantly
it blesses you with the taste of it.</p>

<p class="indent">Hay can be eaten in great mouthfuls.
It has a chip and a crack at the first bite,
and then it says no more. It sticks out
of one's mouth like whiskers, and you can
watch it with your eye while it moves to
and fro according as your mouth moves.
It is a friendly food, and very good for the
hungry.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page128" id="page128"></a>[pg 128]</span>
Oats are not a food; they are a great
blessing; they are a debauch; they make
you proud, so that you want to kick the
front out of a cart, and climb a tree, and
bite a cow, and chase chickens.</p>

<hr />

<p class="indent">Mary came running and unyoked him
from the cart. She embraced him on the
streaming nose. "You poor thing, you!"
said she, and she took a large paper bag
from the cart and held it to his muzzle.
There was soft sugar in the bag, and half
a pound of it clove to his tongue at the
first lick.</p>

<p class="indent">As she went back to the house with the
bundle of food the ass regarded her.</p>

<p class="indent">"You are a good girl," said the ass.</p>

<p class="indent">He shook himself and dissipated his
thoughts; then he trotted briskly here
and there on the path to see if there was
anything worth looking for.</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page129" id="page129"></a>[pg 129]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER XIX</h2>

<p class="indent">They shared the food: there was little
of it, and some of it was wet; but they
each had a piece of bread, a knuckle of
cheese, and three cold potatoes.</p>

<p class="indent">Mary said there was something wrong
with her, and she passed two of her cold
potatoes to the cherub Art, who ate them
easily.</p>

<p class="indent">"I wish you had given them to me,"
said her father.</p>

<p class="indent">"I'll give you one of mine," said Eileen
Ni Cooley, and she thrust one across to him.</p>

<p class="indent">Mac Cann pushed it entire into his
mouth, and ate it as one who eats in a
trance: he stared at Eileen.</p>

<p class="indent">"Why did you give me your potato?"
said he.</p>

<p class="indent">Eileen blushed until not a single freckle
in her face was visible.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page130" id="page130"></a>[pg 130]</span>
"I don't know," she answered.</p>

<p class="indent">"You don't seem to know anything at
all this day," he complained. "You're
full of fun," said he.</p>

<p class="indent">He lit his pipe, and, after pulling for a
while at it, he handed it to the woman.</p>

<p class="indent">"Take a draw at that pipe," he commanded,
"and let us be decent with each
other."</p>

<p class="indent">Eileen Ni Cooley did take a draw at
the pipe, but she handed it back soon.</p>

<p class="indent">"I never was much at the smoking,"
said she.</p>

<p class="indent">Caeltia had his pipe going at full blast.
He was leaning against the wall with his
eyes half closed, and was thinking deeply
between puffs.</p>

<p class="indent">Finaun had a good grip on Mary's hair,
which he was methodically plaiting and unloosening
again. He was sunken in reverie.</p>

<p class="indent">Mary was peeping from beneath her lids
at Art, and was at the same time watching
everybody else to see that she was not
observed.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page131" id="page131"></a>[pg 131]</span>
Art was whistling to himself in a low
tone, and he was looking fixedly at a
spider.</p>

<p class="indent">The spider was hauling on a loose rope of
his tent, and he was very leisurely. One
would have thought that he was smoking
also.</p>

<p class="indent">"What did you have for dinner?" said
Art to the spider.</p>

<p class="indent">"Nothing, sir, but a little, thin, wisp of
a young fly," said the spider.</p>

<p class="indent">He was a thick-set, heavy kind of spider,
and he seemed to be middle-aged, and
resigned to it.</p>

<p class="indent">"That is all I had myself," said Art.
"Are the times bad with you now, or are
they middling?"</p>

<p class="indent">"Not so bad, glory be to God! The
flies do wander in through the holes, and
when they come from the light outside to
the darkness in here, sir, we catch them
on the wall, and we crunch their bones."</p>

<p class="indent">"Do they like that?"</p>

<p class="indent">"They do not, sir, but we do. The
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page132" id="page132"></a>[pg 132]</span>
lad with the stout, hairy legs, down there
beside your elbow, caught a blue-bottle
yesterday; there was eating on that fellow,
I tell you, and he's not all eaten yet, but
that spider is always lucky, barring the
day he caught the wasp."</p>

<p class="indent">"That was a thing he didn't like?"
queried Art.</p>

<p class="indent">"Don't mention it to him, sir, he doesn't
care to talk about it."</p>

<p class="indent">"What way are you going to fasten up
your rope?" said Art.</p>

<p class="indent">"I'll put a spit on the end of it, and then
I'll thump it with my head to make it
stick."</p>

<p class="indent">"Well, good luck to yourself."</p>

<p class="indent">"Good luck to your honour."</p>

<hr />

<p class="indent">Said Patsy to Caeltia, pointing to Finaun:</p>

<p class="indent">"What does he be thinking about when
he gets into them fits?"</p>

<p class="indent">"He does be talking to the hierarchy,"
replied Caeltia.</p>

<p class="indent">"And who are themselves?"</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page133" id="page133"></a>[pg 133]</span>
"They are the people in charge of this
world."</p>

<p class="indent">"Is it the kings and the queens and the
Holy Pope?"</p>

<p class="indent">"No, they are different kinds of people."</p>

<p class="indent">Patsy yawned.</p>

<p class="indent">"What does he be talking to them
about?"</p>

<p class="indent">"Every kind of thing," replied Caeltia,
and yawned also. "They are asking him
for advice now."</p>

<p class="indent">"What is he saying?"</p>

<p class="indent">"He is talking about love," said Caeltia.</p>

<p class="indent">"He is always talking about that," said
Patsy.</p>

<p class="indent">"And," said Caeltia, "he is talking
about knowledge."</p>

<p class="indent">"It's another word of his."</p>

<p class="indent">"And he is saying that love and
knowledge are the same thing."</p>

<p class="indent">"I wouldn't put it past him," said Patsy.</p>

<hr />

<p class="indent">For he was in a bad temper. Either
the close confinement, or the dull weather,
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page134" id="page134"></a>[pg 134]</span>
or the presence of Eileen Ni Cooley, or
all of these, had made him savage.</p>

<p class="indent">He arose and began striding through the
narrow room, kicking stones from one side
of the place to the other and glooming
fiercely at everybody. Twice he halted
before Eileen Ni Cooley, staring at her,
and twice, without a word said, he resumed
his marching.</p>

<p class="indent">Suddenly he leaned his back against the
wall facing her, and shouted:</p>

<p class="indent">"Well, Eileen a grah, the man went
away from you, the man with the big
stick and the lengthy feet. Ah! that's
a man you'd be crying out for and you
all by yourself in the night."</p>

<p class="indent">"He was a good man," said Eileen;
"there was no harm in that man,
Padraig."</p>

<p class="indent">"Maybe he used to be putting his two
arms around you now and then beside a
hedge and giving you long kisses on the
mouth?"</p>

<p class="indent">"He used to be doing that."</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page135" id="page135"></a>[pg 135]</span>
"Aye did he, indeed, and he wasn't the
first man to do that, Eileen."</p>

<p class="indent">"Maybe you're right, Padraig."</p>

<p class="indent">"Nor the twenty-first."</p>

<p class="indent">"You've got me here in the house,
Padraig, and the people around us are
your own friends."</p>

<p class="indent">Caeltia also had arisen to his feet and
was staring morosely at Eileen. Suddenly
he leaped to her, wrenched the shawl from
her head with a wide gesture, and gripped
her throat between his hands; as her
head touched the ground she gasped, and
then, and just as suddenly, he released
her. He stood up, looking wildly at Patsy,
who stared back at him grinning like a
madman, then he stumbled across to Finaun
and took his hands between his own.</p>

<p class="indent">"You must not hurt me, my dear,"
said Finaun, smiling gravely at him.</p>

<p class="indent">Mary had leaped to Art, whose arm she
took, and they backed to the end of the
room.</p>

<p class="indent">Eileen stood up; she arranged her dress
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page136" id="page136"></a>[pg 136]</span>
and wrapped the shawl about her head
again; she gazed fearlessly at Mac Cann.</p>

<p class="indent">"The house is full of your friends,
Padraig, and there's nobody here with
me at all; there's no man could want
better than that for himself."</p>

<p class="indent">Patsy's voice was hoarse.</p>

<p class="indent">"You're looking for fight?"</p>

<p class="indent">"I'm looking for whatever is coming,"
she replied steadily.</p>

<p class="indent">"I'm coming, then," he roared, and he
strode to her. He lifted his hands above
his head, and brought them down so
heavily on her shoulders that she staggered.</p>

<p class="indent">"Here I am," said he, staring into her
face.</p>

<p class="indent">She closed her eyes.</p>

<p class="indent">"I knew it wasn't love you wanted,
Padraig; it was murder you wanted, and
you have your wish."</p>

<p class="indent">She was swaying under his weight as
she spoke; her knees were giving beneath
her.</p>

<p class="indent">"Eileen," said Patsy, in a small voice,
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page137" id="page137"></a>[pg 137]</span>
"I'm going to tumble; I can't hold myself
up, Eileen; my knees are giving way
under me, and I've only got my arms
round your neck."</p>

<p class="indent">She opened her eyes and saw him sagging
against her, with his eyes half closed and
his face gone white.</p>

<p class="indent">"Sure, Padraig!" said she.</p>

<p class="indent">She flung her arms about his body and
lifted him, but the weight was too much,
and he went down.</p>

<p class="indent">She crouched by him on the floor, hugging
his head against her breast.</p>

<p class="indent">"Sure, listen to me, Padraig; I never
did like any one in the world but yourself;
there wasn't a man of them all was more
to me than a blast of wind; you were the
one I liked always. Listen to me now,
Padraig. Don't I be wanting you day
and night, and saying prayers to you in
the darkness and crying out in the dawn;
my heart is sore for you, so it is: there's
a twist in us, O my dear. Don't you be
minding the men; whatever they did it
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page138" id="page138"></a>[pg 138]</span>
was nothing, it was nothing more than
beasts playing in a field and not caring
anything. We are beside one another for
a minute now. When I would put my
hand on my breast in the middle of a
laugh it was you I was touching, and I
do never stop thinking of you in any place
under the sky."</p>

<p class="indent">They were kissing each other like lost
souls; they babbled and clung to each
other; they thrust one another's head
back to stare at it, and pursued the head
with their violent lips.</p>

<hr />

<p class="indent">It was a time before they all got to sleep
that night, but they did sleep at the end
of it.</p>

<p class="indent">They stretched in the darkness with
their eyes closed, and the night folded
them around, separating each one from
his fellow, and putting on each the enchantment
of silence and blindness. They
were no longer together although they
were lying but a few inches apart; there
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page139" id="page139"></a>[pg 139]</span>
was only the darkness that had no inches
to it; the darkness that has no beginning
and no end; that appears and disappears,
calling hush as it comes and goes, and
holding peace and terror in either invisible
hand; there was no silver moon in the sky
and no sparkle of white stars; there was
only darkness and silence and the steady
hushing of the rain.</p>

<hr />

<p class="indent">When he awoke in the morning Mac Cann
rolled urgently on his elbow and stared to
where Eileen Ni Cooley had stretched
herself for sleep—but she was not there,
she was not anywhere.</p>

<p class="indent">He shouted, and the company sprang
to their feet.</p>

<p class="indent">"She got out through the window," he
roared.</p>

<p class="indent">"The devil damn the soul of her," said
he.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page141" id="page141"></a>[pg 141]</span></p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="center"><a name="bk3" id="bk3"></a>BOOK III</p>

<p class="center">BRIEN O'BRIEN</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page143" id="page143"></a>[pg 143]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER XX</h2>

<p class="indent">They continued their travels.</p>

<p class="indent">It would be more correct to say they
continued their search for food, for that in
reality was the objective of each day's
journeying.</p>

<p class="indent">Moving thus, day by day, taking practically
any road that presented itself, they
had wandered easily through rugged, beautiful
Donegal down into Connaught. They
had camped on the slopes of rough mountains,
slept peacefully in deep valleys
that wound round and round like a corkscrew,
traversed for weeks in Connemara
by the clamorous sea where they lived
sumptuously on fish, and then they struck
to the inland plains again, and away by
curving paths to the County Kerry.</p>

<p class="indent">At times Mac Cann got work to do—to
mend a kettle that had a little hole in it, to
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page144" id="page144"></a>[pg 144]</span>
stick a handle on a pot, to stiffen the last
days of a bucket that was already long past
its labour, and he did these jobs sitting in
the sunlight on dusty roads, and if he did
not do them Mary did them for him while
he observed her critically and explained
both to her and to his company the mystery
of the tinker's craft.</p>

<p class="indent">"There's a great deal," he would say,
"in the twist of the hand."</p>

<p class="indent">And again, but this usually to Art when
that cherub tried his skill on a rusty pot:</p>

<p class="indent">"You'll never make a good tinker unless
you've got a hand on you. Keep your
feet in your boots and get to work with
your fingers."</p>

<p class="indent">And sometimes he would nod contentedly
at Mary and say:</p>

<p class="indent">"There's a girl with real hands on her
that aren't feet."</p>

<p class="indent">Hands represented to him whatever of
praiseworthy might be spoken of by a
man, but feet were in his opinion rightly
covered, and ought not to be discovered
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page145" id="page145"></a>[pg 145]</span>
except in minatory conversation. One ran
on them! Well, it was a dog's trade, or
a donkey's; but hands! he expanded to
that subject, and could loose thereon a
gale of praise that would blow all other
conversation across the border.</p>

<p class="indent">They set their camp among roaring fairs
where every kind of wild man and woman
yelled salutation at Patsy and his daughter,
and howled remembrance of ten and twenty-year
old follies, and plunged into drink
with the savage alacrity of those to whom
despair is a fairer brother than hope, and
with some of these people the next day's
journey would be shared, rioting and
screaming on the lonely roads, and these
people also the angels observed and were
friendly with.</p>

<p class="indent">One morning they were pacing on their
journey. The eyes of the little troop
were actively scanning the fields on either
hand. They were all hungry, for they
had eaten nothing since the previous midday.
But these fields were barren of
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page146" id="page146"></a>[pg 146]</span>
food. Great stretches of grass stretched
away to either horizon, and there was
nothing here that could be eaten except
by the donkey.</p>

<p class="indent">As they went they saw a man sitting on
a raised bank. His arms were folded; he
had a straw in his mouth; there was a
broad grin on his red face; a battered
hat was thrust far back on his head, and
from beneath this a brush of stiff hair
poked in any direction like an ill-tied
bundle of black wire.</p>

<p class="indent">Mac Cann stared at that red joviality.</p>

<p class="indent">"There's a man," said he to Caeltia,
"that hasn't got a care in the world."</p>

<p class="indent">"It must be very bad for him," commented
Caeltia.</p>

<p class="indent">"Holloa, mister," cried Patsy heartily,
"how's everything?"</p>

<p class="indent">"Everything's fine," beamed the man,
"how's yourself?"</p>

<p class="indent">"We're holding up, glory be to God!"</p>

<p class="indent">"That's the way."</p>

<p class="indent">He waved his hand against the horizon.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page147" id="page147"></a>[pg 147]</span>
"There's weather for you," and he spoke
with the proud humility of one who had
made that weather, but would not boast.
His eye was steady on Mac Cann.</p>

<p class="indent">"I've got a hunger on me that's worth
feeding, mister."</p>

<p class="indent">"We've all got that," replied Patsy,
"and there's nothing in the cart barring
its timbers. I'm keeping an eye out, tho',
and maybe we'll trip over a side of bacon in
the middle of the road or a neat little patch
of potatoes in the next field and it full of
the flowery boyoes."</p>

<p class="indent">"There's a field a mile up this road,"
said the man, "and everything you could
talk about is in that field."</p>

<p class="indent">"Do you tell me!" said Patsy briskly.</p>

<p class="indent">"I do: every kind of thing is in that
field, and there's rabbits at the foot of the
hill beyond it."</p>

<p class="indent">"I used to have a good shot with a stone,"
said Patsy.</p>

<p class="indent">"Mary," he continued, "when we come
to the field let yourself and Art gather up
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page148" id="page148"></a>[pg 148]</span>
the potatoes while Caeltia and myself take
stones in our hands to kill the rabbits."</p>

<p class="indent">"I'm coming along with you," said the
man, "and I'll get my share."</p>

<p class="indent">"You can do that," said Patsy.</p>

<p class="indent">The man scrambled down the bank.
There was something between his knees of
which he was very careful.</p>

<p class="indent">"What sort of a thing is that?" said
Mary.</p>

<p class="indent">"It's a concertina and I do play tunes on
it before the houses, and that's how I make
my money."</p>

<p class="indent">"The musiciner will give us a tune after
we get a feed," said Patsy.</p>

<p class="indent">"Sure enough," said the man.</p>

<p class="indent">Art stretched out his hand.</p>

<p class="indent">"Let me have a look at the musical instrument,"
said he.</p>

<p class="indent">The man handed it to him and fell into
pace beside Patsy and Caeltia. Mary and
Finaun were going as usual one on either
side of the ass, and the three of them returned
to their interrupted conversation.
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page149" id="page149"></a>[pg 149]</span>
Every dozen paces Finaun would lean to
the border of the road and pluck a fistful
of prime grass or a thistle or a clutch of
chickweed, and he would put these to the
ass's mouth.</p>

<p class="indent">Patsy was eyeing the man.</p>

<p class="indent">"What's your name, mister?" said he.</p>

<p class="indent">"I was known as Old Carolan, but now
the people call me Billy the Music."</p>

<p class="indent">"How is it that I never met you before?"</p>

<p class="indent">"I'm from Connemara."</p>

<p class="indent">"I know every cow-track and bohereen
in Connemara, and I know every road in
Donegal and Kerry, and I know everybody
that's on them roads, but I don't know you,
mister."</p>

<p class="indent">The man laughed at him.</p>

<p class="indent">"I'm not long on the roads, so how could
you know me? What are you called yourself?"</p>

<p class="indent">"I'm called Padraig Mac Cann."</p>

<p class="indent">"I know you well, for you stole a hen and
a pair of boots off me ten months ago when
I lived in a house."</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page150" id="page150"></a>[pg 150]</span>
"Do you tell me?" said Mac Cann.</p>

<p class="indent">"I do; and I never grudged them to you,
for that was the day that everything
happened to me."</p>

<p class="indent">Mac Cann was searching his head to find
from whom he had stolen a hen and a pair
of boots at the one time.</p>

<p class="indent">"Well, glory be to God!" he cried.
"Isn't it the queer world! Are you old
Carolan, the miserly man of Temple Cahill?"</p>

<p class="indent">The man laughed and nodded.</p>

<p class="indent">"I used to be him, but now I'm Billy the
Music, and there's my instrument under the
boy's oxter."</p>

<p class="indent">Patsy stared at him.</p>

<p class="indent">"And where's the house and the cattle,
and the hundred acres of grass land and
glebe, and the wife that people said you
used to starve the stomach out of?"</p>

<p class="indent">"Faith, I don't know where they are, and
I don't care either," and he shook with the
laughter as he said it.</p>

<p class="indent">"And your sister that killed herself climbing
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page151" id="page151"></a>[pg 151]</span>
out of a high window on a windy night
to search for food among the neighbours?"</p>

<p class="indent">"She's dead still," said the man, and he
doubled up with glee.</p>

<p class="indent">"I declare," said Patsy, "that it's the
end of the world."</p>

<p class="indent">The man broke on his eloquence with a
pointed finger.</p>

<p class="indent">"There's the field I was telling you about
and it's weighty to the ribs with potatoes
and turnips."</p>

<p class="indent">Patsy turned to his daughter.</p>

<p class="indent">"Gather in the potatoes; don't take
them all from the one place, but take
them from here and there the way they
won't be missed, and then go along the road
with the cart for twenty minutes and be
cooking them. Myself and Caeltia will
catch up on you in a little time and we'll
bring good meat with us."</p>

<p class="indent">Caeltia and he moved to the right where a
gentle hill rose against the sky. The hill
was thickly wooded, massive clumps of trees
were dotted every little distance, and
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page152" id="page152"></a>[pg 152]</span>
through these one could see quiet, green
spaces drowsing in the sun.</p>

<p class="indent">When they came to the fringing trees
Patsy directed his companion to go among
them some little distance and then to charge
here and there, slashing against the trees
and the ground with a stick.</p>

<p class="indent">Caeltia did that, and at the end of a
quarter of an hour Patsy had three rabbits
stretched under his hand.</p>

<p class="indent">"That's good enough," he called; "we'll
go on now after the people."</p>

<p class="indent">They stowed the rabbits under their coats
and took the road.</p>

<p class="indent">They soon caught on their companions.
The cart was drawn to the side of the road,
at a little distance the ass was browsing, and
Mary had a fire going in the brazier and the
potatoes ready for the pot.</p>

<p class="indent">Patsy tossed the rabbits to her.</p>

<p class="indent">"There you are, my girl," said he, and,
with Caeltia, he sank down on the grassy
margin of the road and drew out his pipe.</p>

<p class="indent">The strange man was sitting beside Art,
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page153" id="page153"></a>[pg 153]</span>
to whom he was explaining the mechanism
of a concertina.</p>

<p class="indent">"While we are waiting," said Patsy to
him, "you can tell us all the news; tell us
what happened to the land and what you're
doing on the road; and there is a bit of
twist to put in your pipe so that you'll
talk well."</p>

<p class="indent">Mary broke in:</p>

<p class="indent">"Wait a minute now, for I want to hear
that story; let yourself help me over with
the brazier and we can all sit together."</p>

<p class="indent">There was a handle to the bucket and
through this they put a long stick and lifted
all bodily to the butt of the hedge.</p>

<p class="indent">"Now we can sit together," said Mary,
"and I can be cooking the food and listening
to the story at the same time."</p>

<p class="indent">"I'd sooner give you a tune on the concertina,"
said Billy the Music.</p>

<p class="indent">"You can do that afterwards," replied
Patsy.</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page154" id="page154"></a>[pg 154]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER XXI</h2>

<p class="indent">"I'll tell you the story," said Billy the
Music, "and here it is:</p>

<p class="indent">"A year ago I had a farm in the valley.
The sun shone into it, and the wind didn't
blow into it for it was well sheltered, and the
crops that I used to take off that land would
astonish you.</p>

<p class="indent">"I had twenty head of cattle eating the
grass, and they used to get fat quick and
they used to give good milk into the bargain.
I had cocks and hens for the eggs and the
market, and there was a good many folk
would have been glad to get my farm.</p>

<p class="indent">"There were ten men always working on
the place, but at harvest-time there would
be a lot more, and I used to make them work
too. Myself and my son and my wife's
brother (a lout, that fellow!) used to run
after the men, but it was hard to keep up
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page155" id="page155"></a>[pg 155]</span>
with them, for they were great schemers.
They tried to do as little work as ever they
were able, and they tried to get as much
money out of me as they could manage.
But I was up to them lads, and it's mighty
little they got out of me without giving
twice as much for it.</p>

<p class="indent">"Bit by bit I weeded out the men until at
last I only had the ones I wanted, the tried
and trusty men. They were a poor lot, and
they didn't dare to look back at me when I
looked at them; but they were able to work,
and that is all I wanted them to do, and I
saw that they did it.</p>

<p class="indent">"As I'm sitting beside you on this bank
to-day I'm wondering why I took all the
trouble I did take, and what, in the name of
this and that, I expected to get out of it all.
I usen't go to bed until twelve o'clock at
night, and I would be up in the dawn
before the birds. Five o'clock in the morning
never saw me stretching in the warm
bed, and every day I would root the men out
of their sleep; often enough I had to throw
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page156" id="page156"></a>[pg 156]</span>
them out of bed, for there wasn't a man of
them but would have slept rings round the
clock if he got the chance.</p>

<p class="indent">"Of course I knew that they didn't want
to work for me, and that, bating the hunger,
they'd have seen me far enough before
they'd lift a hand for my good; but I had
them by the hasp, for as long as men have to
eat, any man with the food can make them
do whatever he wants them to do; wouldn't
they stand on their heads for twelve hours a
day if you gave them wages? Aye would
they, and eighteen hours if you held them
to it.</p>

<p class="indent">"I had the idea too that they were trying
to rob me, and maybe they were. It
doesn't seem to matter now whether they
robbed me or not, for I give you my word
that the man who wants to rob me to-day is
welcome to all he can get and more if I had
it."</p>

<p class="indent">"Faith, you're the kind man!" said
Patsy.</p>

<p class="indent">"Let that be," said Billy the Music.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page157" id="page157"></a>[pg 157]</span>
"The secret of the thing was that I loved
money, hard money, gold and silver pieces,
and pieces of copper. I liked it better
than the people who were round me. I
liked it better than the cattle and the crops.
I liked it better than I liked myself, and
isn't that the queer thing? I put up with
the silliest ways for it, and I lived upside
down and inside out for it. I tell you I
would have done anything just to get
money, and when I paid the men for their
labour I grudged them every penny that
they took from me.</p>

<p class="indent">"It did seem to me that in taking my
metal they were surely and openly robbing
me and laughing at me as they did it. I
saw no reason why they shouldn't have
worked for me for nothing, and if they had
I would have grudged them the food they
ate and the time they lost in sleeping, and
that's another queer thing, mind you!"</p>

<p class="indent">"If one of them men," said Patsy
solemnly, "had the spunk of a wandering
goat or a mangy dog he'd have taken a
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page158" id="page158"></a>[pg 158]</span>
graipe to yourself, mister, and he'd have
picked your soul out of your body and slung
it on a dung-heap."</p>

<p class="indent">"Don't be thinking," replied the other,
"that men are courageous and fiery animals,
for they're not, and every person that pays
wages to men knows well that they're as
timid as sheep and twice as timid. Let me
tell you too that all the trouble wasn't on
their side; I had a share of it and a big
share."</p>

<p class="indent">Mac Cann interrupted solemnly—</p>

<p class="indent">"That's what the fox told the goose when
the goose said that the teeth hurted him.
'Look at the trouble I had to catch you,'
said the fox."</p>

<p class="indent">"We won't mind that," said Billy the
Music.</p>

<p class="indent">"I was hard put to it to make the money.
I was able to knock a good profit out of the
land and the beasts and the men that
worked for me; and then, when I came to
turn the profit into solid pieces, I found that
there was a world outside of my world, and
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page159" id="page159"></a>[pg 159]</span>
it was truly bent on robbing me, and, what's
more, it had thought hard for generations
about the best way of doing it. It had
made its scheme so carefully that I was as
helpless among them people as the labourers
were with me. Oh! they got me, and they
squeezed me, and they marched off smiling
with the heaviest part of my gain, and they
told me to be a bit more polite or they'd
break me into bits, and I was polite too.
Ah! there's a big world outside the little
world, and maybe there's a bigger world
outside that, and grindstones in it for all the
people that are squeezers in their own place.</p>

<p class="indent">"The price I thought fair for the crop
was never the price I got from the jobbers.
If I sold a cow or a horse I never got as much
as half of what I reckoned on. There were
rings and cliques in the markets everywhere,
and they knew how to manage me. It was
they who got more than half the money I
made, and they had me gripped so that I
couldn't get away. It was for these people
I used to be out of bed at twelve o'clock at
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page160" id="page160"></a>[pg 160]</span>
night and up again before the fowl were
done snoring, and it was for them I tore the
bowels out of my land, and hazed and bedevilled
every man and woman and dog that
came in sight of me, and when I thought
of these market-men with their red jowls
and their 'take it or leave it' I used to
get so full of rage that I could hardly
breathe.</p>

<p class="indent">"I had to take it because I couldn't
afford to leave it, and then I'd go home
again trying to cut it finer, trying to skin
an extra chance profit off the land and
workers, and I do wonder now that the men
didn't try to kill me or didn't commit
suicide. Aye, I wonder that I didn't
commit suicide myself by dint of the rage
and greed and weariness that was my share
of life day and night.</p>

<p class="indent">"I got the money anyhow, and, sure
enough, the people must have thought I was
the devil's self; but it was little I cared what
they thought, for the pieces were beginning
to mount up in the box, and one fine day the
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page161" id="page161"></a>[pg 161]</span>
box got so full that not another penny-piece
could have been squeezed sideways into it,
so I had to make a new box, and it wasn't so
long until I made a third box and a fourth
one, and I could see the time coming when I
would be able to stand in with the market-men,
and get a good grip on whatever might
be going."</p>

<p class="indent">"How much did you rob in all?" said
Patsy.</p>

<p class="indent">"I had all of two thousand pounds."</p>

<p class="indent">"That's a lot of money, I'm thinking."</p>

<p class="indent">"It is so, and it took a lot of getting, and
there was twenty damns went into the box
with every one of the yellow pieces."</p>

<p class="indent">"A damn isn't worth a shilling," said
Patsy. "You can have them from me at
two for a ha'penny, and there's lots of
people would give them to yourself for
nothing, you rotten old robber of the world!
And if I had the lump of twist back that I
gave you a couple of minutes ago I'd put
it in my pocket, so I would, and I'd sit
on it."</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page162" id="page162"></a>[pg 162]</span>
"Don't forget that you're talking about
old things," said Billy the Music.</p>

<p class="indent">"If I was one of your men," shouted
Patsy, "you wouldn't have treated me that
way."</p>

<p class="indent">Billy the Music smiled happily at him.</p>

<p class="indent">"Wouldn't I?" said he, with his head on
one side.</p>

<p class="indent">"You would not," said Patsy, "for I'd
have broken your skull with a spade."</p>

<p class="indent">"If you had been one of my men," the
other replied mildly, "you'd have been as
tame as a little kitten; you'd have crawled
round me with your hat in your hand and
your eyes turned up like a dying duck's, and
you'd have said, 'Yes, sir,' and 'No, sir,'
like the other men that I welted the stuffing
out of with my two fists, and broke the spirits
of with labour and hunger. Don't be talking
now, for you're an ignorant man in these
things, although you did manage to steal
a clocking hen off me the day I was busy."</p>

<p class="indent">"And a pair of good boots," said Patsy
triumphantly.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page163" id="page163"></a>[pg 163]</span>
"Do you want to hear the rest of the
story?"</p>

<p class="indent">"I do so," said Patsy; "and I take back
what I said about the tobacco; here's
another bit of it for your pipe."</p>

<p class="indent">"Thank you kindly," replied Billy.</p>

<p class="indent">He shook the ashes from his pipe, filled it,
and continued his tale.</p>

<p class="indent">"On the head of all these things a wonderful
thing happened to me."</p>

<p class="indent">"That's the way to start," said Patsy
approvingly. "You're a good story-teller,
mister."</p>

<p class="indent">"It isn't so much that," replied Billy,
"but it's a good story and a wonderful
story."</p>

<p class="indent">"The potatoes are nearly done, Mary, a
grah?"</p>

<p class="indent">"They'll be done in a short while."</p>

<p class="indent">"Hold your story for a few minutes until
we eat the potatoes and a few collops of the
rabbits, for I tell you that I'm drooping with
the hunger."</p>

<p class="indent">"I didn't eat anything myself," replied
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page164" id="page164"></a>[pg 164]</span>
Billy, "since the middle of yesterday, and
the food there has a smell to it that's making
me mad."</p>

<p class="indent">"It's not quite done yet," said Mary.</p>

<p class="indent">"It's done enough," replied her father.
"Aren't you particular this day! Pull them
over here and share them round, and don't
be having the men dying on your hands."</p>

<p class="indent">Mary did so, and for five minutes there
was no sound except that of moving jaws,
and by that time there was no more food
in sight.</p>

<p class="indent">"Ah!" said Patsy with a great sigh.</p>

<p class="indent">"Aye, indeed!" said Billy the Music
with another sigh.</p>

<p class="indent">"Put on more of the potatoes now,"
Patsy commanded his daughter, "and be
cooking them against the time this story
will be finished."</p>

<p class="indent">"I wish I had twice as much as I had,"
said Art.</p>

<p class="indent">"You got twice as much as me," cried
Patsy angrily, "for I saw the girl giving it
to you."</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page165" id="page165"></a>[pg 165]</span>
"I'm not complaining," replied Art;
"I'm only stating a fact."</p>

<p class="indent">"That's all right," said Patsy.</p>

<p class="indent">The pipes were lit, and all eyes turned to
Billy the Music. Patsy leaned back on
his elbow, and blew his cloud.</p>

<p class="indent">"Now we'll have the rest of the story,"
said he.</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page166" id="page166"></a>[pg 166]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER XXII</h2>

<p class="indent">"This," continued Billy the Music, "is
the wonderful thing that happened to me.</p>

<p class="indent">"Bit by bit I got fonder of the money.
The more I got of it the more I wanted. I
used to go away by myself to look at it and
handle it and count it. I didn't store it all
in the house; I only kept enough there to
make the people think it was all there, and as
every one was watching that and watching
each other (for they all wanted to steal it)
it was safe enough.</p>

<p class="indent">"They didn't know it was mostly copper
was in that box, but copper it was, and
some silver that I couldn't fit into the other
boxes.</p>

<p class="indent">"There was a place at the end of the big
barn, just underneath the dog's kennel—maybe
you remember my dog, Patsy?"</p>

<p class="indent">"A big black-and-white snarly devil of a
bull-terrier?" said Patsy, thoughtfully.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page167" id="page167"></a>[pg 167]</span>
"That's him."</p>

<p class="indent">"I remember him well," said Patsy. "I
fed him once."</p>

<p class="indent">"You poisoned him," said Billy the
Music quickly.</p>

<p class="indent">"That's a hard word to say," replied
Patsy, scraping at his chin.</p>

<p class="indent">Billy the Music looked very fixedly at
him, and he also scraped meditatively at
his bristles.</p>

<p class="indent">"It doesn't matter now," said he. "That
was the dog. I made a place under his
kennel. It was well made. If you had
pulled the kennel aside you'd have seen
nothing but the floor. Down there I kept
the three boxes of gold, and while I'd be
looking at them the dog would be lurching
around wondering why he wasn't allowed to
eat people—I was a bit timid with that dog
myself—and it was one day while I was
handling the money that the thing happened.</p>

<p class="indent">"There came a thump on the barn door.
The dog made a noise away down in the heel
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page168" id="page168"></a>[pg 168]</span>
of his throat and loped across; he stuck his
nose against the crack at the bottom and
began to sniff and scratch.</p>

<p class="indent">"'Strangers there,' said I. I put the
money away quietly, lifted the kennel back
to its place, and went over to open the door.</p>

<p class="indent">"There were two men standing outside,
and the dog sprang for one of them as if he
had been shot out of a gun.</p>

<p class="indent">"But that man was quick. He took the
beast on the jump, caught him by the
chaps, and slung him with a heave of his
arm. I don't know where he slung him
to; I never saw the dog alive after that,
and I did think it was that jerk killed
him."</p>

<p class="indent">"Begor!" said Patsy.</p>

<p class="indent">"It must have been within half an hour or
so that you gave him the poisoned meat,
Patsy."</p>

<p class="indent">"It was a lengthy mutton bone," murmured
Mac Cann.</p>

<p class="indent">"Whatever it was!" said Billy the
Music.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page169" id="page169"></a>[pg 169]</span>
"The men walked in, they shut the barn
door behind them and locked it, for the
key was inside whenever I was.</p>

<p class="indent">"Well! I always had the use of my
hands and my feet and my teeth, but I had
no chance there, so in a few minutes I sat
down on the kennel to get my breath back
and to mop up the blood that was teeming
out of my nose. The two men, I will say,
were very quiet with it all—they waited
for me.</p>

<p class="indent">"One of them was a middle-sized block
of a man, and he looked as if his head had
been rolled in tar—"</p>

<p class="indent">"Eh!" said Patsy loudly.</p>

<p class="indent">"The other one was a big, young man
with a girl's face; he had blue eyes and curls
of gold, and he was wearing a woman's
skirt—the raggedest old——"</p>

<p class="indent">"Begor!" cried Patsy, and he leaped
furiously to his feet.</p>

<p class="indent">"What's wrong with you?" said Billy the
Music.</p>

<p class="indent">Patsy beat his fists together.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page170" id="page170"></a>[pg 170]</span>
"I've been looking for that pair of playboys
for a full year," he barked.</p>

<p class="indent">"Do you know them?" said Billy the
Music, with equal excitement.</p>

<p class="indent">"I don't know them, but I met them,
and the girl yonder met them too, the
thieves!"</p>

<p class="indent">"They are a pair of dirty dogs," said
Mary coldly.</p>

<p class="indent">"And when I do meet them," said Patsy
savagely, "I'll kill the pair of them: I will
so.</p>

<p class="indent">Billy the Music laughed.</p>

<p class="indent">"I wouldn't try killing them lads; I did
try it once, but they wouldn't let me. Tell
us what they did to yourself, and then I'll
go on with my story, for I'm real curious
about those two."</p>

<p class="indent">Mac Cann put his pipe into his pocket.</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page171" id="page171"></a>[pg 171]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER XXIII</h2>

<p class="indent">Said Patsy:</p>

<p class="indent">"There isn't very much to tell, but this
is how it happened.</p>

<p class="indent">"About two weeks before your dog died
myself and the girl were tramping up towards
Dublin. We hadn't got the ass
with us that time, for it was in pawn to a
woman that peddled fish in the south-west
of Connemara. She was keeping the ass
and cart for us while we were away, and she
was going to give us something for their
loan at the heel of the season. She was
an old rip, that one, for she sold the ass on
us to one man and she sold the cart to
another man, and we had the trouble of
the world getting the pair of them together
again—but that's no matter.</p>

<p class="indent">"One morning, fresh and early, we were
beating along a road that comes down from
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page172" id="page172"></a>[pg 172]</span>
the mountains and runs away into Donnybrook.
I had just picked up a little goose
that I found walking along with its nose up,
and I thought maybe we could sell the
creature to some person in the city who
wanted a goose.</p>

<p class="indent">"We turned a bend in the road (it's a
twisty district), and there I saw two men
sitting on the grass on each side of the
path. The two men were sitting with the
full width of the road between them, and
they were clean, stark, stone naked.</p>

<p class="indent">"They hadn't got as much as a shirt;
they hadn't a hat; they hadn't got anything
at all on them barring their skins.</p>

<p class="indent">"'Whoo!' said I to myself, and I caught
a grip of the girl. 'We'll be taking another
road,' said I, and round we sailed with the
goose and all.</p>

<p class="indent">"But the two men came after us, and
what with the goose and the girl, they
caught up on us too.</p>

<p class="indent">"One of them was a bullet-headed thief
and he did look as if he had been rolled in
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page173" id="page173"></a>[pg 173]</span>
tar, and I hope he was. The other was a
dandy lad that never got his hair cut since
he was a mother's boy.</p>

<p class="indent">"'Be off with the pair of you,' said I, 'ye
indecent devils. What do ye want with
honest folk and you in your pelt?'</p>

<p class="indent">"The bullet-headed one was bouncing
round me like a rubber ball.</p>

<p class="indent">"'Take off your clothes, mister,' said
he.</p>

<p class="indent">"'What!' said I.</p>

<p class="indent">"'Take off your clothes quick,' said he,
'or I'll kill you.'</p>

<p class="indent">"So, with that I jumped into the middle
of the road, and I up with the goose, and
I hit that chap such a welt on the head that
the goose bursted. Then the lad was into
me and we went round the road like thunder
and lightning till the other fellow joined in,
and then Mary welted into the lot of us with
a stick that she had, but they didn't mind
her any more than a fly. Before you could
whistle, mister, they had me stripped to the
buff, and before you could whistle again
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page174" id="page174"></a>[pg 174]</span>
they had the girl stripped, and the pair of
them were going down the road as hard as
ever they could pelt with our clothes under
their oxters."</p>

<p class="indent">"Begor!" said Billy the Music.</p>

<p class="indent">"I tell you so," grinned Patsy.</p>

<p class="indent">"There was herself and myself standing
in the middle of the road with nothing
to cover our nakedness but a bursted
goose."</p>

<p class="indent">"That was the queer sight," said
Billy the Music looking thoughtfully at
Mary.</p>

<p class="indent">"You keep your eyes to yourself, mister,"
said Mary hotly.</p>

<p class="indent">"What did you do then?" said Billy.</p>

<p class="indent">"We sat down on the side of the road for
a long time until we heard footsteps and
then we hid ourselves.</p>

<p class="indent">"I peeped over the hedge and there was
a man coming along the path. He was
a nice-looking man with a black bag
in his hand and he was walking fast.
When he came exactly opposite me I
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page175" id="page175"></a>[pg 175]</span>
jumped the hedge and I took the clothes
off him—"</p>

<p class="indent">Billy the Music slapped his palm on his
knee.</p>

<p class="indent">"You did so!"</p>

<p class="indent">"I did so," said Patsy.</p>

<p class="indent">"He was grumbling all the time, but as
soon as I let him loose he started to run, and
that was the last I saw of him.</p>

<p class="indent">"After a bit a woman came along the
road, and Mary took the clothes off her.
She was a quiet, poor soul, and she didn't
say a word to either of us. We left her the
goose and the man's black bag for payment,
and then the pair of us started off, and we
didn't stop running till we came to the
County Kerry.</p>

<p class="indent">"These are the clothes I'm telling you
about," said Patsy; "I have them on me
this minute."</p>

<p class="indent">"It's a great story," said Billy the
Music.</p>

<p class="indent">"I can tell you something further about
these people," said Caeltia smiling.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page176" id="page176"></a>[pg 176]</span>
"Can you so?" cried Patsy.</p>

<p class="indent">"I can, but the man here hasn't finished
what he was telling us."</p>

<p class="indent">"I was forgetting him," said Mac Cann.
"Put another pinch in your pipe, mister,
and tell us what happened to you after
that."</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page177" id="page177"></a>[pg 177]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER XXIV</h2>

<p class="indent">Billy the Music did put another pinch of
tobacco into his pipe, and after drawing on
it meditatively for a few minutes he snuffed
it out with his thumb and put it into his
pocket. Naturally he put it in upside
down, so that the tobacco might drop from
the pipe, for he was no longer a saving man.</p>

<p class="indent">"They were surely the two men that I'm
telling you about," said he, "and there they
were standing up in front of me while I was
sneezing the blood out of my nose.</p>

<p class="indent">"'What do you want?' said I to themselves,
and all the time I was peeping here
and there to see if there wasn't a bit of a
stick or a crowbar maybe lying handy.</p>

<p class="indent">"It was the boyo in the skirt that answered
me:</p>

<p class="indent">"'I wanted to have a look at yourself,'
said he.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page178" id="page178"></a>[pg 178]</span>
"'Take your eye-full and go away, for
God's sake,' said I.</p>

<p class="indent">"'You dirty thief!' said he to me.</p>

<p class="indent">"'What's that for?' said I.</p>

<p class="indent">"'What do you mean by getting me
thrown out of heaven?' said he.</p>

<p class="indent"> "...! Well, mister honey, that was a
question to worry any man, and it worried
me. I couldn't think what to say to him.
'Begor!' said I, and I sneezed out some
more of my blood.</p>

<p class="indent">"But the lad was stamping mad.</p>

<p class="indent">"'If I could blot you from the light of
life without doing any hurt to myself, I'd
smash you this mortal minute,' said he.</p>

<p class="indent">"'For the love of heaven,' said I, 'tell
me what I did to yourself, for I never did see
you before this day, and I wish I didn't see
you now.'</p>

<p class="indent">"The bullet-headed man was standing by
all the time, and he chewing tobacco.</p>

<p class="indent">"'Have it out with him, Cuchulain,'
said he. 'Kill him,' said he, 'and send him
out among the spooks.'</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page179" id="page179"></a>[pg 179]</span>
"But the other man calmed down a bit,
and he came over to me wagging the girl's
skirts.</p>

<p class="indent">"'Listen!' said he, 'I'm the Seraph
Cuchulain.'</p>

<p class="indent">"'Very good,' said I.</p>

<p class="indent">"'I'm your Guardian Angel,' said he.</p>

<p class="indent">"'Very good,' said I.</p>

<p class="indent">"'I'm your Higher Self,' said he, 'and
every rotten business you do down here does
be vibrating against me up there. You
never did anything in your life that wasn't
rotten. You're a miser and a thief, and
you got me thrown out of heaven because of
the way you loved money. You seduced
me when I wasn't looking. You made a
thief of me in a place where it's no fun to
be a robber, and here I am wandering the
dirty world on the head of your unrighteous
ways. Repent, you beast,' said he, and
he landed me a clout on the side of the head
that rolled me from one end of the barn to
the other.</p>

<p class="indent">"'Give him another one,' said the bullet-headed
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page180" id="page180"></a>[pg 180]</span>
man, and he chewing strongly on
his plug.</p>

<p class="indent">"'What have you got to do with it?'
said I to him. 'You're not my Guardian
Angel, God help me!'</p>

<p class="indent">"'How dare you,' said the bullet-headed
man. 'How dare you set this honest party
stealing the last threepenny bit of a poor
man?' and with that he made a clout at me.</p>

<p class="indent">"'What threepenny bit are you talking
about?' said I.</p>

<p class="indent">"'My own threepenny bit,' said he.
'The only one I had. The one I dropped
outside the gates of hell.'</p>

<p class="indent">"Well, that beat me! 'I don't care
what you say any longer,' said I, 'you can
talk till you're blue and I won't care what
you say,' and down I sat on the kennel and
shed my blood.</p>

<p class="indent">"'You must repent of your own free will,'
said Cuchulain, marching to the door.</p>

<p class="indent">"'And you'd better hurry up, too,' said the
other fellow, 'or I'll hammer the head off you.'</p>

<p class="indent">"The queer thing is that I believed every
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page181" id="page181"></a>[pg 181]</span>
word the man said. I didn't know what he
was talking about, but I did know that he
was talking about something that was real
although it was beyond me. And there
was the way he said it too, for he spoke like
a bishop, with fine, shouting words that I
can't remember now, and the months gone
past. I took him at his word anyhow, and
on the minute I began to feel a different
creature, for, mind you, a man can no more
go against his Guardian Angel than he
can climb a tree backwards.</p>

<p class="indent">"As they were going out of the barn
Cuchulain turned to me:</p>

<p class="indent">"'I'll help you to repent,' said he, 'for I
want to get back again, and this is the way
I'll help you. I'll give you money, and I'll
give you piles of it.'</p>

<p class="indent">"The two of them went off then, and I
didn't venture out of the barn for half-an-hour.</p>

<hr />

<p class="indent">"I went into the barn next day, and
what do you think I saw?"</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page182" id="page182"></a>[pg 182]</span>
"The floor was covered with gold pieces,"
said Patsy.</p>

<p class="indent">Billy nodded:</p>

<p class="indent">"That's what I saw. I gathered them
up and hid them under the kennel. There
wasn't room for the lot of them, so I rolled
the rest in a bit of a sack and covered them
up with cabbages.</p>

<p class="indent">"The next day I went in and the floor
was covered with gold pieces, and I swept
them up and hid them under the cabbages
too. The day after that and the next day
and the day after that again it was the same
story. I didn't know where to put the
money. I had to leave it lying on the floor,
and I hadn't as much as a dog to guard it
from the robbers."</p>

<p class="indent">"You had not," said Patsy, "and that's
the truth."</p>

<p class="indent">"I locked the barn; then I called up all
the men; I paid them their wages, for what
did I want with them any longer and I
rolling in gold? I told them to get out of
my sight, and I saw every man of them off
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page183" id="page183"></a>[pg 183]</span>
the land. Then I told my wife's brother
that I didn't want him in my house any
longer, and I saw him off the land. Then
I argued my son out of the house, and I
told my wife that she could go with him
if she wanted to, and then I went back to
the barn.</p>

<p class="indent">"But, as I told you a minute ago, I was a
changed man. The gold was mounting up
on me, and I didn't know what to do with it.
I could have rolled in it if I wanted to, and
I did roll in it, but there was no fun in
that.</p>

<p class="indent">"This was the trouble with me—I
couldn't count it; it had gone beyond me;
there were piles of it; there were stacks of
it; it was four feet deep all over the floor,
and I could no more move it than I could
move a house.</p>

<p class="indent">"I never wanted that much money, for no
man could want it: I only wanted what I
could manage with my hands; and the fear
of robbers was on me to that pitch that I
could neither sit nor stand nor sleep.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page184" id="page184"></a>[pg 184]</span>
"Every time I opened the door the place
was fuller than it was the last time, and, at
last, I got to hate the barn. I just couldn't
stand the look of the place, and the light
squinting at me from thousands and thousands
of gold corners.</p>

<p class="indent">"It beat me at last. One day I marched
into the house, and I picked up the concertina
that my son bought (I was able to play
it well myself) and said I to the wife:</p>

<p class="indent">"'I'm off.'</p>

<p class="indent">"'Where are you off?'</p>

<p class="indent">"'I'm going into the world.'</p>

<p class="indent">"'What will become of the farm?'</p>

<p class="indent">"'You can have it yourself,' said I, and
with that I stepped clean out of the house
and away to the road. I didn't stop walking
for two days, and I never went back
from that day to this.</p>

<p class="indent">"I do play on the concertina before the
houses, and the people give me coppers. I
travel from place to place every day, and
I'm as happy as a bird on a bough, for I've
no worries and I worry no one."</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page185" id="page185"></a>[pg 185]</span>
"What did become of the money?" said
Patsy.</p>

<p class="indent">"I'm thinking now that it might have
been fairy gold, and, if it was, nobody could
touch it."</p>

<p class="indent">"So," said Mac Cann, "that's the sort of
boys they were?"</p>

<p class="indent">"That's the sort."</p>

<p class="indent">"And one of them was your own Guardian
Angel!"</p>

<p class="indent">"He said that."</p>

<p class="indent">"And what was the other one?"</p>

<p class="indent">"I don't know, but I do think that he was
a spook."</p>

<p class="indent">Patsy turned to Finaun:</p>

<p class="indent">"Tell me, mister, is that a true story now,
or was the lad making it up?"</p>

<p class="indent">"It is true," replied Finaun.</p>

<p class="indent">Patsy considered for a moment.</p>

<p class="indent">"I wonder," said he musingly, "who is
my own Guardian Angel?"</p>

<p class="indent">Caeltia hastily put the pipe into his
pocket.</p>

<p class="indent">"I am," said he.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page186" id="page186"></a>[pg 186]</span>
"Oh, bedad!"</p>

<p class="indent">Mac Cann placed his hands on his knees
and laughed heartily.</p>

<p class="indent">"You are! and I making you drunk every
second night in the little pubs!"</p>

<p class="indent">"You never made me drunk."</p>

<p class="indent">"I did not, for you've got a hard
head surely, but there's a pair of us in it,
mister."</p>

<p class="indent">He was silent again, then:</p>

<p class="indent">"I wonder who is the Guardian Angel of
Eileen Ni Cooley? for he has his work cut
out for him, I'm thinking."</p>

<p class="indent">"I am her Guardian Angel," said Finaun.</p>

<p class="indent">"Are you telling me that?"</p>

<p class="indent">Mac Cann stared at Finaun, and he
lapsed again to reverie.</p>

<p class="indent">"Ah, well!" said he to Billy the Music,
"it was a fine story you told us, mister, and
queer deeds you were mixed up in; but I'd
like to meet the men that took our clothes,
I would so."</p>

<p class="indent">"I can tell you something more about
them," Caeltia remarked.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page187" id="page187"></a>[pg 187]</span>
"So you said a while back. What is it
you can tell us?"</p>

<p class="indent">"I can tell you the beginning of all that
tale."</p>

<p class="indent">"I'd like to hear it," said Billy the Music.</p>

<p class="indent">"There is just a piece I will have to
make up from what I heard since we came
here, but the rest I can answer for because
I was there at the time."</p>

<p class="indent">"I remember it too," said Art to Caeltia,
"and when you have told your story I'll
tell another one."</p>

<p class="indent">"Serve out the potatoes, Mary," said
Mac Cann, "and then you can go on with
the story. Do you think is that ass all
right, alannah?"</p>

<p class="indent">"He's eating the grass still, but I think
he may be wanting a drink."</p>

<p class="indent">"He had a good drink yesterday," said
her father, and he shifted to a more comfortable
position.</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page188" id="page188"></a>[pg 188]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER XXV</h2>

<p class="indent">Said Caeltia:</p>

<p class="indent">"When Brien O'Brien died people said
that it did not matter very much because
he would have died young in any case.
He would have been hanged, or his head
would have been split in two halves with a
hatchet, or he would have tumbled down
the cliff when he was drunk and been
smashed into jelly. Something like that
was due to him, and everybody likes to see
a man get what he deserves to get.</p>

<p class="indent">"But, as ethical writs cease to run when
a man is dead, the neighbours did not stay
away from his wake. They came, and they
said many mitigating things across the body
with the bandaged jaws and the sly grin,
and they reminded each other of this and
that queer thing which he had done, for
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page189" id="page189"></a>[pg 189]</span>
his memory was crusted over with stories
of wild, laughable things, and other things
which were wild but not laughable.</p>

<p class="indent">"Meanwhile he was dead, and one was at
liberty to be a trifle sorry for him. Further,
he belonged to the O'Brien nation—a stock
to whom reverence was due. A stock not
easily forgotten. The historic memory
could reconstruct forgotten glories of station
and battle, of terrible villainy and
terrible saintliness, the pitiful, valorous,
slow descent to the degradation which was
not yet wholly victorious. A great stock!
The O'Neills remembered it. The O'Tools
and the Mac Sweeneys had stories by the
hundred of love and hate. The Burkes and
the Geraldines and the new strangers had
memories also.</p>

<p class="indent">"His family was left in the poorest way,
but they were used to that, for he had kept
them as poor as he left them, or found them,
for that matter. They had shaken hands
with Charity so often that they no longer
disliked the sallow-faced lady, and so certain
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page190" id="page190"></a>[pg 190]</span>
small gifts made by the neighbours were
accepted, not very thankfully, but very
readily. These gifts were almost always in
kind. A few eggs. A bag of potatoes. A
handful of meal. A couple of twists of tea—such
like.</p>

<p class="indent">"One of the visitors, however, moved by
an extraordinary dejection, slipped a silver
threepenny-piece into the hand of Brien's
little daughter, Sheila, aged four years,
and later on she did not like to ask for it
back again.</p>

<p class="indent">"Little Sheila had been well trained by
her father. She knew exactly what should
be done with money, and so, when nobody
was looking, she tip-toed to the coffin and
slipped the threepenny-piece into Brien's
hand. That hand had never refused money
when it was alive, it did not reject it either
when it was dead.</p>

<p class="indent">"They buried him the next day.</p>

<p class="indent">"He was called up for judgment the day
after, and made his appearance with a miscellaneous
crowd of wretches, and there he
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page191" id="page191"></a>[pg 191]</span>
again received what was due to him. He
was removed, protesting and struggling, to
the place decreed:</p>

<p class="indent">"'Down,' said Rhadamanthus, pointing
with his great hand, and down he went.</p>

<p class="indent">"In the struggle he dropped the threepenny-piece,
but he was so bustled and
heated that he did not observe his loss. He
went down, far down, out of sight, out of
remembrance, to a howling black gulf with
others of his unseen kind.</p>

<p class="indent">"A young seraph, named Cuchulain,
chancing to pass that way shortly afterwards,
saw the threepenny-piece peeping
brightly from the rocks, and he picked it
up.</p>

<p class="indent">"He looked at it in astonishment. He
turned it over and over, this way and that
way. Examined it at the stretch of his arm,
and peered minutely at it from two inches
distance.</p>

<p class="indent">"'I have never in my life seen anything
so beautifully wrought,' said he, and, having
stowed it in his pouch along with some
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page192" id="page192"></a>[pg 192]</span>
other trinkets, he strolled homewards again
through the massy gates.</p>

<p class="indent">"It was not long until Brien discovered
his loss, and suddenly, through the black
region, his voice went mounting and brawling.</p>

<p class="indent">"'I have been robbed,' he yelled. 'I
have been robbed in heaven!'</p>

<p class="indent">"Having begun to yell he did not
stop. Sometimes he was simply angry and
made a noise. Sometimes he became sarcastic
and would send his query swirling
upwards.</p>

<p class="indent">"'Who stole the threepenny-bit?' he
roared. He addressed the surrounding
black space:</p>

<p class="indent">"'Who stole the last threepenny-bit of a
poor man?'</p>

<p class="indent">"Again and again his voice pealed upwards.
The pains of his habitation lost all
their sting for him. His mind had nourishment,
and the heat within him vanquished
the fumes without. He had a grievance,
a righteous cause, he was buoyed and
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page193" id="page193"></a>[pg 193]</span>
strengthened, nothing could silence him.
They tried ingenious devices, all kinds of
complicated things, but he paid no heed,
and the tormentors were in despair.</p>

<p class="indent">"'I hate these sinners from the kingdom
of Kerry,' said the Chief Tormentor, and he
sat moodily down on his own circular saw;
and that worried him also, for he was clad
only in a loin-cloth.</p>

<p class="indent">"'I hate the entire Clann of the Gael,'
said he; 'why cannot they send them somewhere
else?' and then he started practising
again on Brien.</p>

<p class="indent">"It was no use. Brien's query still blared
upwards like the sound of the great trump
itself. It wakened and rung the rocky
caverns, screamed through fissure and funnel,
and was battered and slung from pinnacle
to crag and up again. Worse! his
companions in doom became interested and
took up the cry, until at last the uproar
became so appalling that the Master himself
could not stand it.</p>

<p class="indent">"'I have not had a wink of sleep for three
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page194" id="page194"></a>[pg 194]</span>
nights,' said that harassed one, and he sent
a special embassy to the powers.</p>

<p class="indent">"Rhadamanthus was astonished when they
arrived. His elbow was leaning on his vast
knee, and his heavy head rested on a hand
that was acres long, acres wide.</p>

<p class="indent">"'What is all this about?' said he.</p>

<p class="indent">"'The Master cannot go to sleep,' said
the spokesman of the embassy, and he
grinned as he said it, for it sounded queer
even to himself.</p>

<p class="indent">"'It is not necessary that he should sleep,'
said Rhadamanthus. 'I have never slept
since time began, and I will never sleep until
time is over. But the complaint is curious.
What has troubled your master?'</p>

<p class="indent">"'Hell is turned upside down and inside
out,' said the fiend. 'The tormentors are
weeping like little children. The principalities
are squatting on their hunkers
doing nothing. The orders are running
here and there fighting each other. The
styles are leaning against walls shrugging
their shoulders, and the damned are shouting
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page195" id="page195"></a>[pg 195]</span>
and laughing and have become callous
to torment.'</p>

<p class="indent">"'It is not my business,' said the judge.</p>

<p class="indent">"'The sinners demand justice,' said the
spokesman.</p>

<p class="indent">"'They've got it,' said Rhadamanthus,
'let them stew in it.'</p>

<p class="indent">"'They refuse to stew,' replied the spokesman,
wringing his hands.</p>

<p class="indent">"Rhadamanthus sat up.</p>

<p class="indent">"'It is an axiom in law,' said he, 'that
however complicated an event may be, there
can never be more than one person at the
extreme bottom of it. Who is the person?'</p>

<p class="indent">"'It is one Brien of the O'Brien nation,
late of the kingdom of Kerry. A bad one!
He got the maximum punishment a week
ago.'</p>

<p class="indent">"For the first time in his life Rhadamanthus
was disturbed. He scratched his head,
and it was the first time he had ever done
that either.</p>

<p class="indent">"'You say he got the maximum,' said
Rhadamanthus, 'then it's a fix! I have
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page196" id="page196"></a>[pg 196]</span>
damned him for ever, and better or worse
than that cannot be done. It is none of my
business,' said he angrily, and he had the
deputation removed by force.</p>

<p class="indent">"But that did not ease the trouble. The
contagion spread until ten million billions of
voices were chanting in unison, and uncountable
multitudes were listening between
their pangs.</p>

<p class="indent">"'Who stole the threepenny-bit? Who
stole the threepenny-bit?'</p>

<p class="indent">"That was still their cry. Heaven rang
with it as well as hell. Space was filled with
that rhythmic tumult. Chaos and empty
Nox had a new discord added to their
elemental throes. Another memorial was
drafted below, showing that unless the
missing coin was restored to its owner hell
would have to close its doors. There was a
veiled menace in the memorial also, for
Clause 6 hinted that if hell was allowed to
go by the board heaven might find itself
in some jeopardy thereafter.</p>

<p class="indent">"The document was despatched and considered.
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page197" id="page197"></a>[pg 197]</span>
In consequence a proclamation
was sent through all the wards of Paradise,
calling on whatever person, archangel,
seraph, cherub, or acolyte, had found a
threepenny-piece since mid-day of the tenth
August then instant, that the same person,
archangel, seraph, cherub, or acolyte, should
deliver the said threepenny-piece to Rhadamanthus
at his Court, and should receive in
return a free pardon and a receipt.</p>

<p class="indent">"The coin was not delivered.</p>

<hr />

<p class="indent">"The young seraph, Cuchulain, walked
about like a person who was strange to
himself. He was not tormented: he was
angry. He frowned, he cogitated and fumed.
He drew one golden curl through his fingers
until it was lank and drooping; save the end
only, that was still a ripple of gold. He put
the end in his mouth and strode moodily
chewing it. And every day his feet turned
in the same direction—down the long entrance
boulevard, through the mighty gates,
along the strip of carved slabs, to that piled
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page198" id="page198"></a>[pg 198]</span>
wilderness where Rhadamanthus sat monumentally.</p>

<p class="indent">"Here delicately he went, sometimes with
a hand outstretched to help his foothold,
standing for a space to think ere he jumped
to a farther rock, balancing himself for a
moment ere he leaped again. So he would
come to stand and stare gloomily upon the
judge.</p>

<p class="indent">"He would salute gravely, as was meet,
and say, 'God bless the work'; but
Rhadamanthus never replied, save by a
nod, for he was very busy.</p>

<p class="indent">"Yet the judge did observe him, and
would sometimes heave ponderous lids to
where he stood, and so, for a few seconds,
they regarded each other in an interval of
that unceasing business.</p>

<p class="indent">"Sometimes for a minute or two the
young seraph Cuchulain would look from
the judge to the judged as they crouched
back or strained forward, the good and the
bad all in the same tremble of fear, all unknowing
which way their doom might lead.
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page199" id="page199"></a>[pg 199]</span>
They did not look at each other. They
looked at the judge high on his ebon throne,
and they could not look away from him.
There were those who knew, guessed clearly
their doom; abashed and flaccid they sat,
quaking. There were some who were
uncertain—rabbit-eyed these, not less
quaking than the others, biting at their
knuckles as they peeped upwards. There
were those hopeful, yet searching fearfully
backwards in the wilderness of memory,
chasing and weighing their sins; and these
last, even when their bliss was sealed and
their steps set on an easy path, went faltering,
not daring to look around again, their
ears strained to catch a—'Halt, miscreant!
this other is your way!'</p>

<p class="indent">"So, day by day, he went to stand near
the judge; and one day Rhadamanthus,
looking on him more intently, lifted his
great hand and pointed:</p>

<p class="indent">"'Go you among those to be judged,'
said he.</p>

<p class="indent">"For Rhadamanthus knew. It was his
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page200" id="page200"></a>[pg 200]</span>
business to look deep into the heart and the
mind, to fish for secrets in the pools of being,</p>

<p class="indent">"And the young seraph Cuchulain, still
rolling his golden curl between his lips, went
obediently forward and set down his nodding
plumes between two who whimpered
and stared and quaked.</p>

<p class="indent">"When his turn came, Rhadamanthus
eyed him intently for a long time:</p>

<p class="indent">"'Well!' said Rhadamanthus.</p>

<p class="indent">"The young seraph Cuchulain blew the
curl of gold from his lips:</p>

<p class="indent">"'Findings are keepings,' said he loudly,
and he closed his mouth and stared very
impertinently at the judge.</p>

<p class="indent">"'It is to be given up,' said the judge.</p>

<p class="indent">"'Let them come and take it from me,'
said the seraph Cuchulain. And suddenly
(for these things are at the will of spirits)
around his head the lightnings span, and his
hands were on the necks of thunders.</p>

<p class="indent">"For the second time in his life Rhadamanthus
was disturbed, again he scratched
his head:</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page201" id="page201"></a>[pg 201]</span>
"'It's a fix,' said he moodily. But in a
moment he called to those whose duty it was:</p>

<p class="indent">"'Take him to this side,' he roared.</p>

<p class="indent">"And they advanced. But the seraph
Cuchulain swung to meet them, and his
golden hair blazed and shrieked; and the
thunders rolled at his feet, and about him a
bright network that hissed and stung—and
those who advanced turned haltingly backwards
and ran screaming.</p>

<p class="indent">"'It's a fix,' said Rhadamanthus; and for
a little time he stared menacingly at the
seraph Cuchulain.</p>

<p class="indent">"But only for a little time. Suddenly he
put his hands on the rests of his throne and
heaved upwards his terrific bulk. Never
before had Rhadamanthus stood from his
ordained chair. He strode mightily forward
and in an instant had quelled that rebel.
The thunders and lightnings were but moonbeams
and dew on that stony carcass. He
seized the seraph Cuchulain, lifted him to his
breast as one lifts a sparrow, and tramped
back with him:</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page202" id="page202"></a>[pg 202]</span>
"'Fetch me that other,' said he sternly,
and he sat down.</p>

<p class="indent">"Those whose duty it was sped swiftly
downwards to find Brien of the O'Brien
nation; and while they were gone, all in
vain the seraph Cuchulain crushed flamy
barbs against that bosom of doom. Now,
indeed, his golden locks were drooping and
his plumes were broken and tossed; but his
fierce eye still glared courageously against
the nipple of Rhadamanthus.</p>

<p class="indent">"Soon they brought Brien. He was a
sight of woe—howling, naked as a tree
in winter, black as a tarred wall, carved
and gashed, tattered in all but his throat,
wherewith, until one's ears rebelled, he
bawled his one demand.</p>

<p class="indent">"But the sudden light struck him to a
wondering silence, and the sight of the judge
holding the seraph Cuchulain like a limp
flower to his breast held him gaping.</p>

<p class="indent">"'Bring him here,' said Rhadamanthus.</p>

<p class="indent">"And they brought him to the steps of
the throne.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page203" id="page203"></a>[pg 203]</span>
"'You have lost a medal!' said Rhadamanthus.
'This one has it.'</p>

<p class="indent">"Brien looked straitly at the seraph
Cuchulain.</p>

<p class="indent">"Rhadamanthus stood again, whirled his
arm in an enormous arc, jerked, and let go,
and the seraph Cuchulain went swirling
through space like a slung stone.</p>

<p class="indent">"'Go after him, Kerryman' said Rhadamanthus,
stooping; and he seized Brien by
the leg, whirled him wide and out and far;
dizzy, dizzy as a swooping comet, and down,
and down, and down.</p>

<p class="indent">"Rhadamanthus seated himself. He motioned
with his hand.</p>

<p class="indent">"'Next,' said he coldly.</p>

<p class="indent">"Down went the seraph Cuchulain, swirling
in wide tumbles, scarcely visible for
quickness. Sometimes, with outstretched
hands, he was a cross that dropped plumb.
Anon, head urgently downwards, he dived
steeply. Again, like a living hoop, head
and heels together, he spun giddily. Blind,
deaf, dumb, breathless, mindless; and
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page204" id="page204"></a>[pg 204]</span>
behind him Brien of the O'Brien nation
came pelting and whizzing.</p>

<p class="indent">"What of that journey? Who could give
it words? Of the suns that appeared and
disappeared like winkling eyes. Comets
that shone for an instant, went black and
vanished. Moons that came, and stood,
and were gone. And around all, including
all, boundless space, boundless silence;
the black unmoving void—the deep, unending
quietude, through which they fell
with Saturn and Orion, and mildly-smiling
Venus, and the fair, stark-naked moon, and
the decent earth wreathed in pearl and blue.
From afar she appeared, the quiet one, all
lonely in the void. As sudden as a fair
face in a crowded street. Beautiful as the
sound of falling waters. Beautiful as the
sound of music in a silence. Like a white
sail on a windy sea. Like a green tree in a
solitary place. Chaste and wonderful she
appeared. Flying afar. Flying aloft like a
joyous bird when the morning breaks on the
darkness and he shrills sweet tidings. She
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page205" id="page205"></a>[pg 205]</span>
soared and sang. Gently she sang to timid
pipes and flutes of tender straw and murmuring,
distant strings. A song that grew
and swelled, gathering to a multitudinous,
deep-thundered harmony, until the overburdened
ear failed before the appalling
uproar of her ecstasy, and denounced her.
No longer a star! No longer a bird! A
plumed and horned fury! Gigantic, gigantic,
leaping and shrieking tempestuously,
spouting whirlwinds of lightning, tearing
gluttonously along her path, avid, rampant,
howling with rage and terror she leaped,
dreadfully she leaped and flew....</p>

<hr />

<p class="indent">"Enough! They hit the earth—they were
not smashed, there was that virtue in them.
They hit the ground just outside the village
of Donnybrook where the back road runs to
the hills; and scarcely had they bumped
twice when Brien of the O'Brien nation
had the seraph Cuchulain by the throat.</p>

<p class="indent">"'My threepenny-bit,' he roared, with
one fist up.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page206" id="page206"></a>[pg 206]</span>
"But the seraph Cuchulain only laughed:</p>

<p class="indent">"'That!' said he. 'Look at me, man.
Your little medal dropped far beyond the
rings of Saturn.'</p>

<p class="indent">"And Brien stood back looking at him—He
was as naked as Brien was. He was as
naked as a stone, or an eel, or a pot, or a
new-born babe. He was very naked.</p>

<p class="indent">"So Brien of the O'Brien nation strode
across the path and sat down by the side of
a hedge:</p>

<p class="indent">"'The first man that passes this way,'
said he, 'will give me his clothes, or I'll
strangle him.'</p>

<p class="indent">"The seraph Cuchulain walked over to
him:</p>

<p class="indent">"'I will take the clothes of the second
man that passes,' said he, and he sat down."</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page207" id="page207"></a>[pg 207]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER XXVI</h2>

<p class="indent">"And then," said Mac Cann thoughtfully,
"we came along, and they stole our clothes."</p>

<p class="indent">"That wasn't a bad tale," he continued
to Caeltia. "You are as good a story-teller,
mister, as the man himself," pointing to
Billy the Music.</p>

<p class="indent">Billy replied modestly:</p>

<p class="indent">"It's because the stories were good ones
that they were well told, for that's not my
trade, and what wonder would it be if I
made a botch of it? I'm a musician myself,
as I told you, and there's my instrument,
but I knew an old man in Connaught one
time, and he was a great lad for the stories.
He used to make his money at it, and if
that man was to break off in the middle of
a tale the people would stand up and kill
him, they would so. He was a gifted man,
for he would tell you a story about nothing
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page208" id="page208"></a>[pg 208]</span>
at all, and you'd listen to him with your
mouth open and you afraid that he would
come to the end of it soon, and maybe it
would be nothing more than the tale of how
a white hen laid a brown egg. He would
tell you a thing you knew all your life, and
you would think it was a new thing. There
was no old age in that man's mind, and that's
the secret of story-telling."</p>

<p class="indent">Said Mary:</p>

<p class="indent">"I could listen to a story for a day and
a night."</p>

<p class="indent">Her father nodded acquiescence:</p>

<p class="indent">"So could I, if it was a good story and
well told, and I would be ready to listen to
another one after that."</p>

<p class="indent">He turned to Art:</p>

<p class="indent">"You were saying yourself, sonny, that
there was a story in your head, and if that's
so, now is your chance to tell it; but I'm
doubting you'll be able to do it as well as the
two men here, for you are a youngster, and
story-telling is an old man's trade."</p>

<p class="indent">"I'll do my best," said Art, "but I never
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page209" id="page209"></a>[pg 209]</span>
told a story in my life, and it may not be a
good one at the first attempt."</p>

<p class="indent">"That's all right," replied Mac Cann
encouragingly. "We won't be hard on
you."</p>

<p class="indent">"Sure enough," said Billy the Music,
"and you've listened to the lot of us, so you
will know the road."</p>

<p class="indent">"What are you going to talk about?"
said Caeltia.</p>

<p class="indent">"I'm going to talk about Brien O'Brien,
the same as the rest of you."</p>

<p class="indent">"Did you know him too?" cried Billy.</p>

<p class="indent">"I did."</p>

<p class="indent">"There isn't a person doesn't know that
man," growled Patsy. "Maybe," and he
grinned ferociously as he said it, "maybe
we'll meet him on the road and he tramping,
and perhaps he will tell us a story himself."</p>

<p class="indent">"That man could not tell a story," Finaun
interrupted, "for he has no memory, and
that is a thing a good story-teller ought to
have."</p>

<p class="indent">"If we meet him," said Mac Cann grimly,
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page210" id="page210"></a>[pg 210]</span>
"I'll do something to him and he'll remember
it, and it's likely that he will be able to
make a story out of it too."</p>

<p class="indent">"I only saw him once," said Art, "but
when Rhadamanthus tossed him through
the void I recognised his face, although so
long a time had elapsed since I did see him.
He is now less than he was, but he is, nevertheless,
much more than I had expected
he would be."</p>

<p class="indent">"What is he now?" said Billy the Music.</p>

<p class="indent">"He is a man."</p>

<p class="indent">"We are all that," said Patsy, "and it
isn't any trouble to us."</p>

<p class="indent">"It was more trouble than you imagine,"
said Finaun.</p>

<p class="indent">"I had expected him to be no more than
one of the higher animals, or even that he
might have been dissipated completely
from existence."</p>

<p class="indent">"What was he at the time you met
him?"</p>

<p class="indent">"He was a magician, and he was one of
the most powerful magicians that ever lived.
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page211" id="page211"></a>[pg 211]</span>
He was a being of the fifth round, and he
had discovered many secrets."</p>

<p class="indent">"I have known magicians," commented
Finaun, "and I always found that they were
fools."</p>

<p class="indent">"Brien O'Brien destroyed himself," Art
continued, "he forfeited his evolution and
added treble to his karmic burden because
he had not got a sense of humour."</p>

<p class="indent">"No magician has a sense of humour,"
remarked Finaun, "he could not be a magician
if he had—Humour is the health of
the mind."</p>

<p class="indent">"That," Art broke in, "is one of the
things he said to me. So you see he had
discovered something. He was very near
to being a wise man. He was certainly a
courageous man, or, perhaps, foolhardy;
but he was as serious as a fog, and he could
not bring himself to believe it."</p>

<p class="indent">"Tell us the story," said Caeltia.</p>

<p class="indent">"Here it is," said Art.</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page212" id="page212"></a>[pg 212]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER XXVII</h2>

<p class="indent">"On a day long ago I laboured with the
Army of the Voice. The first syllable of the
great word had been uttered, and in far
eastern space, beyond seven of the flaming
wheels, I and the six sons drew the lives
together and held them for the whirlwind
which is the one. We were waiting for the
second syllable to form the wind.</p>

<p class="indent">"As I stood by my place holding the north
in quietness, I felt a strong vibration between
my hands. Something was interfering
with me. I could not let go, but I
looked behind me, and there I saw a man
standing, and he was weaving spells.</p>

<p class="indent">"It was a short, dark man with a little
bristle of black whisker on his chin and a
stiff bristle of black hair on his head. He
was standing inside a double triangle having
the points upwards, and there were magical
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page213" id="page213"></a>[pg 213]</span>
signs at each point of the triangles. While
I looked, he threw around him from side to
side a flaming circle, and then he threw a
flaming circle about him from front to back,
and he span these so quickly that he was
surrounded by a wall of fire.</p>

<p class="indent">"At him, on the instant, I charged a bolt,
but it could not penetrate his circles; it hit
them and fell harmless, for the circles had a
greater speed than my thunderbolt.</p>

<p class="indent">"He stood so in the triangles, laughing at
me and scratching his chin.</p>

<p class="indent">"I dared not loose my hands again lest
the labour of a cycle should be dissipated in
an instant, and it was no use shouting to the
others, for they also were holding the lives in
readiness for the whirlwind which would
shape them to a globe, so the man had me
at his mercy.</p>

<p class="indent">"He was working against my grip, and he
had amazing power. He had somehow discovered
part of the first syllable of the great
word, and he was intoning this on me between
giggles, but he could not destroy us,
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page214" id="page214"></a>[pg 214]</span>
for together we were equal to the number
of that syllable.</p>

<p class="indent">"When I looked at him again he laughed
at me, and what he said astonished me
greatly.</p>

<p class="indent">"'This,' said he, 'is very funny.'</p>

<p class="indent">"I made no reply to him, being intent
only on holding my grip; but I was reassured,
for, although he poured on me incessantly
the great sound, its effect was
neutralised, for I am a number, and in
totality we were the numbers; nevertheless
the substance did strain and heave so powerfully
that I could do no more than hold it in
place.</p>

<p class="indent">"The man spoke to me again. Said
he:</p>

<p class="indent">"'Do you not think that this is very
funny?'</p>

<p class="indent">"I made no answer for a time, and then I
said:</p>

<p class="indent">"'Who are you?'</p>

<p class="indent">"'A name,' he replied, 'is a power; I
won't give you my name although I would
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page215" id="page215"></a>[pg 215]</span>
like to, for this is a great deed and a funny
one.'</p>

<p class="indent">"'What is your planet?' quoth I.</p>

<p class="indent">"'I won't tell you that,' he replied; 'you
might read my signs and come after me later
on.'</p>

<p class="indent">"I could not but admire the immense impertinence
of his deed.</p>

<p class="indent">"'I know your sign,' said I, 'for you
have already made it three times with your
hand, and there is only one planet of these
systems which has evolved the fifth race, so
I know your planet. Your symbol is the
Mule, and Uriel is your Regent; he will be
coming after you soon, so you had better go
away while you have time.'</p>

<p class="indent">"'If he comes,' said the man, 'I'll put
him in a bottle, and I'll put you in a bottle
too. I won't go for another while, the joke
is too good, and this is only the commencement
of it.'</p>

<p class="indent">"'You will be caught by the second syllable,'
I warned him.</p>

<p class="indent">"'I'll put it in a bottle,' said he grinning
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page216" id="page216"></a>[pg 216]</span>
at me. 'No,' he continued, 'I won't be
caught, I've made my calculations, and it's
not due yet a while.'</p>

<p class="indent">"Again he poured on me the great sound
until I rocked to and fro like a bush in the
wind; but he could not loose my grip, for I
was a part of the word.</p>

<p class="indent">"'Why are you doing this?' I asked him.</p>

<p class="indent">"'I'll tell you that,' he replied.</p>

<p class="indent">"'I am two things, and I am great in each
of these two things. I am a great magician,
and I am a great humourist. Now, it is
very easy to prove that one is a magician,
for one has only to do things and then
people are astonished; they are filled with
fear and wonder; they fall down and worship
and call one god and master. But it
is not so easy to be a humourist, because in
that case it is necessary to make people
laugh. If a man is to be a magician it is
necessary, if his art is to be appreciated,
that the people around him be fools. If a
person desires to be a humourist it is
necessary that the people around him shall
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page217" id="page217"></a>[pg 217]</span>
be at least as wise as he is, otherwise his
humour will not be comprehended. You
see my predicament! and it is a cruel one,
for I cannot forego either of these ambitions—they
are my karma. Laughter is
purely an intellectual quality, and in my
planet I have no intellectual equals: my
jokes can only be enjoyed by myself, and it
is of the essence of humour that one share
it, or it turns to ill-health and cynicism and
mental sourness. My humour cannot be
shared with the people of my planet, for they
are all half a round beneath me—they can
never see the joke, they only see consequences,
and these blind them to the rich drollery of
any affair, and render me discontented and
angry. My humour is too great for them,
for it is not terrestrial but cosmic; it can
only be appreciated by the gods, therefore, I
have come out here to seek my peers and to
have at least one hearty laugh with them.'</p>

<p class="indent">"'One must laugh,' he continued, 'for
laughter is the health of the mind, and I
have not laughed for a crore of seasons.'</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page218" id="page218"></a>[pg 218]</span>
"Thereupon he took up the syllable and
intoned its flooding sound so that the matter
beneath my hands strained against me almost
unbearably.</p>

<p class="indent">"I turned my head and stared at the little
man as he laughed happily to himself and
scraped his chin.</p>

<p class="indent">"'You are a fool,' said I to that man.</p>

<p class="indent">"The smile vanished from his face and a
shade of dejection took its place.</p>

<p class="indent">"'Is it possible, Regent, that you have no
sense of humour!' said he.</p>

<p class="indent">"'This,' I replied, 'is not humorous; it
is only a practical joke; it is no more than
incipient humour; there is no joke in it but
only mischief, for to interfere with work is
the humour of a babe or a monkey. You
are a thoroughly serious person, and you will
not make a joke in ten eternities; that also
is in your karma.'</p>

<p class="indent">"At these words his eyes brooded on me
darkly, and an expression of real malignancy
came on his face: he stamped at me from
the triangles and hissed with rage.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page219" id="page219"></a>[pg 219]</span>
"'I'll show you something else,' said he,
'and if it doesn't make you laugh it will
make everybody else who hears about it
laugh for an age.'</p>

<p class="indent">"I saw that he was meditating a personal
evil to me, but I was powerless, for I could
not let go my grip on the substance.</p>

<p class="indent">"He lifted his hands against me then, but,
at the moment, there came a sound, so low,
so deep, it could scarcely be heard, and with
equal strong intensity the sound pervaded
all the spaces and brooded in every point
and atom with its thrilling breath—we
were about to shape to the whirlwind.</p>

<p class="indent">"The man's hands fell, and he stared at
me.</p>

<p class="indent">"'Oh!' said he, and he said 'Oh' three
times in a whisper.</p>

<p class="indent">"The sound was the beginning of the
second syllable.</p>

<p class="indent">"'I thought I had time,' he gasped: 'my
calculations were wrong.'</p>

<p class="indent">"'The joke is against you,' said I to the
man.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page220" id="page220"></a>[pg 220]</span>
"'What will I do?' he screamed.</p>

<p class="indent">"'Laugh,' I replied, 'laugh at the joke.'</p>

<p class="indent">"Already his flying circles had ceased to
revolve, and their broad flame was no more
than a blue flicker that disappeared even as
I looked at them. He stood only in the
triangles, and he was open to my vengeance.
His staring, haggard eyes fell on the bolt in
my hand.</p>

<p class="indent">"'There is no need for that,' said he, and
he did speak with some small dignity, 'I am
caught by the sound, and there is an end to
me.'</p>

<p class="indent">"And that was true, so I did not loose my
bolt.</p>

<p class="indent">"Already his triangles were crumbling.
He sank on his haunches, clasped his
hands about his legs and bowed his head
on his knees. I could see that he knew
all was lost, and that he was making a last
desperate effort to guard his entity from
dissolution, and he succeeded, for, one
instant before the triangles had disappeared,
he had vanished, but he could not
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page221" id="page221"></a>[pg 221]</span>
have entirely escaped the sound, that was
impossible, and if he reached his planet it
must have been as a life of the third round
instead of the fifth to which he had attained.
He had the entire of his evolution to perform
over again and had, moreover, added
weightily to his karmic disabilities.</p>

<p class="indent">"I saw him no more, nor did I hear
of him again until the day when Brien
O'Brien was thrown from the gates, and
then I knew that he and O'Brien were the
same being, and that he had really escaped
and was a fourth round life of the lowest
globe.</p>

<p class="indent">"Perhaps he will be heard of again, for
he is an energetic and restless being to whom
an environment is an enemy and to whom
humour is an ambition and a mystery."</p>

<hr />

<p class="indent">"That is the end of my story," said Art
modestly.</p>

<p class="indent">Mac Cann regarded him indulgently from
a cloud of smoke:</p>

<p class="indent">"It wasn't as good as the other ones," he
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page222" id="page222"></a>[pg 222]</span>
remarked, "but that's not your fault, and
you're young into the bargain."</p>

<p class="indent">"He is not as young as he looks," remarked
Finaun.</p>

<p class="indent">"A good story has to be about ordinary
things," continued Patsy, "but there isn't
anybody could tell what your story was
about."</p>

<p class="indent">Billy the Music here broke in:</p>

<p class="indent">"The person I would have liked to hear
more of is Cuchulain, for he is my own
guardian angel and it's him I'm interested
in. The next time I meet him I'll ask him
questions."</p>

<p class="indent">He glanced around the circle:</p>

<p class="indent">"Is there anybody would like to hear a
tune on the concertina? I have it by
my hand here, and the evening is before
us."</p>

<p class="indent">"You can play it for us the next time we
meet," said Patsy, "for we are all tired
listening to the stories, and you are tired
yourself."</p>

<p class="indent">He lifted to his feet then and yawned
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page223" id="page223"></a>[pg 223]</span>
heartily with his arms at full stretch and his
fists clenched:</p>

<p class="indent">"We had better be moving," he continued,
"for the evening is coming on and
it's twenty miles to the fair."</p>

<p class="indent">They harnessed the ass.</p>

<p class="indent">"I'm going the opposite way to you,"
said Billy the Music.</p>

<p class="indent">"All right," said Patsy. "God be with
you, mister."</p>

<p class="indent">"God be with yourselves," replied Billy
the Music.</p>

<p class="indent">He tramped off then in his own direction,
while Mac Cann and his companions took
their road with the ass.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page225" id="page225"></a>[pg 225]</span></p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="center"><a name="bk4" id="bk4"></a>BOOK IV</p>

<p class="center">MARY MAC CANN</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page227" id="page227"></a>[pg 227]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER XXVIII</h2>

<p class="indent">The search for work and food led them
back, but by different paths, through Kerry,
up into Connemara, and thence by stony
regions to Donegal again and the rugged
hills.</p>

<p class="indent">Their days were uneventful but they were
peaceful: their nights were pleasant, and
seldom did they lack for even one meal in
the day. When they did so lack they passed
the unwelcome hour in the silence of those
to whom such an hiatus was not singular.
Under Mac Cann's captaincy the tiny band
moved from meal to meal as another army
would invest and sack and depart from the
cities on its route.</p>

<p class="indent">Sometimes at night a ballad-singer would
stray on their road, an angry man from
whom no person had purchased songs for
two days, and in return for victual this one
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page228" id="page228"></a>[pg 228]</span>
would entertain them with his lays and
recite the curses he had composed against
those who did not pay the musician.</p>

<p class="indent">Sometimes they came on gatherings of
tinkers and pedlars, tramps, and trick-men,
and in the midst of these they would journey
towards a fair. Uproarious nights then!
Wild throats yelling at the stars and much
loud trampling on the roads as the women
fought and screeched, and the men howled
criticism and encouragement, and came by
mere criticism themselves to the battle.
Paltry onslaughts these, more of word than
of weapon to the fray that left some blooded
noses and swollen lips as the one hour
memorial of their deeds.</p>

<p class="indent">And again the peaceful nights, the calm
stars, the quiet moon strewing her path in
silver; space for the eye, the ear, and the
soul; the whispering of lovely trees; the
unending rustle of the grass, and the wind
that came and went away and came, chanting
its long rhythms or hushing its chill
lullaby by the fields and the hills.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page229" id="page229"></a>[pg 229]</span>
On a day when they had finished eating
Finaun beckoned Caeltia and Art aside
and they spoke closely together. Turning
to Mac Cann and his daughter Finaun
said:</p>

<p class="indent">"We have finished what we came to do,
my friends."</p>

<p class="indent">Patsy nodded frowningly at him.</p>

<p class="indent">"What was it you came to do?"</p>

<p class="indent">"I came to give help to the powers," said
Finaun mildly.</p>

<p class="indent">"I didn't see you doing much," replied
Patsy.</p>

<p class="indent">"And," Finaun continued smilingly, "the
time has come for us to go away."</p>

<p class="indent">"You're in a hurry, I suppose?"</p>

<p class="indent">"We are not in a great hurry, but the
time has come for us to go back."</p>

<p class="indent">"Very well!" said Patsy. "We aren't
so far from where we started. If we take
one of the turns on the right here and bear
away to the west by Cnuc-Mahon and
Tober-Fola and Rath-Cormac we'll come
to the place where your things are buried,
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page230" id="page230"></a>[pg 230]</span>
and then I suppose—we can get there in
three days, if that will do you?"</p>

<p class="indent">"That will do," said Finaun.</p>

<p class="indent">During the remainder of the day he
and his companions walked together talking
among themselves while Mac Cann and his
daughter went with the ass.</p>

<p class="indent">Patsy also was preoccupied all that day
and she had her own thoughts; they
scarcely spoke at all and the ass was bored.</p>

<p class="indent">At night they camped under a broken
arch, the vestige of they knew not what
crumbled building, and, seated around the
brazier, they sunk to silence, each staring at
the red glow and thinking according to their
need, and it was then that Art, lifting his
eyes from the brazier, looked for the first
time at Mary and saw that she was beautiful.</p>

<p class="indent">She had been looking at him—that was
now her one occupation. She existed only
in these surreptitious examinations. She
dwelt on him broodingly as a miser burns on
his gold or a mother hovers hungrily upon
her infant, but he had never given her any
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page231" id="page231"></a>[pg 231]</span>
heed. Now he was looking at her, and across
the brazier their eyes communed deeply.</p>

<p class="indent">There was birth already between them—sex
was born, and something else was shaping
feebly to existence. Love, that protection
and cherishing, that total of life, the shy
prince scarcely to be known among the
teeming populations of the world, raised
languidly from enchanted sleep a feeble
hand.</p>

<p class="indent">What fire did their eyes utter! The quiet
night became soundingly vocal. Winged
words were around her again as in that twilight
when her heart loosed its first trials of
song. Though the night was about her
black and calm there was dawn and sunlight
in her heart, and she bathed herself
deeply in the flame.</p>

<p class="indent">And he! There is no knowing but this,
that his eyes poured soft fire, enveloping,
exhaustless. He surrounded her as with a
sea. There she slid and fell and disappeared,
to find herself again, renewed, reborn,
thrilling to the embrace of those waters,
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page232" id="page232"></a>[pg 232]</span>
wondrously alive and yet so languid that
she could not move. There she rocked like
a boat on the broad waves and, saving the
limitless sea, there was nothing in sight.
Almost he even had disappeared from her
view but not from her sensation: he was
an influence wide as the world, deep and
steep and tremendous as all space.</p>

<p class="indent">They were alone. The quiet men seated
beside them thinned and faded and disappeared:
the night whisked from knowledge
as a mounting plume of smoke that
eddies and is gone: the trees and the hills
tripped softly backwards and drooped away.
Now they were in a world of their own,
microscopic, but intense: a sphere bounded
by less than the stretching of their arms: a
circle of such violent movement that it was
stationary as a spinning-top, and her mind
whirled to it, and was still from very activity.
She could not think, she could not
try to think, that was her stillness, but she
could feel and that was her movement; she
was no longer a woman but a responsiveness:
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page233" id="page233"></a>[pg 233]</span>
she was an universal contact thrilling
at every pore and point: she was surrendered
and lost and captured and no
longer pertained to herself.</p>

<p class="indent">So much can the eye do when the gathered
body peers meaningly through its lens.
They existed in each other: in and through
each other: the three feet of distance was
no longer there: it had disappeared, and
they were one being swinging on league-long
wings through vast spaces.</p>

<p class="indent">When they dropped to sleep it was merely
a slipping backwards, a motion that they
did not feel: they were asleep before they
dropped asleep: they were asleep long
before that, drugged and senseless with the
strong potion of the body, stronger than
aught in the world but the sharp essence of
the mind that awakens all things and never
permits them to be lulled again.</p>

<hr />

<p class="indent">When morning dawned and the camp
awakened there was some little confusion,
for Mac Cann was not in the place where he
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page234" id="page234"></a>[pg 234]</span>
had slept and they could not imagine where
he had gone to.</p>

<p class="indent">Mary discussed his disappearance in all
kinds of terms, Caeltia alone, with a downcast
air, refusing to speak of it. They
waited during hours for him, but he did not
return, and at noon they decided to wait no
longer but to go on their journey leaving
him to catch on them if he was behind or
hoping to gain on him if he was in advance,
for their route was marked.</p>

<p class="indent">The angels did seem a trifle lost in his
absence, and they looked with some dubiety
at Mary when she took charge of their
journey and of the daily provision of their
food.</p>

<p class="indent">Food had to be gotten, and she had to
discover it not alone for herself but for these
other mouths. It was the first time she had
been alone and, although her brows and
lips were steady, her heart beat terror
through her body.</p>

<p class="indent">For she had to do two things which she
had never done and had never surmised
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page235" id="page235"></a>[pg 235]</span>
really had to be done. She had to think,
and she had to follow her thought by doing
the thing she thought of. Which of these
two were the more terrible she did not know,
but there was no difficulty as to which she
must do first, the simple orderliness of logic
clamoured that she must think before she
could do anything, and, so, her brain set to
the painful weaving of webs too flimsy at
first for any usage; but on this day she
discovered where her head lay and how to
use it without any assistance. She had
memory to work with also, the recollection
of her father's activities, and memory is
knowledge; a well-packed head and energy—that
is the baggage for life, it is the
baggage for eternity.</p>

<p class="indent">She moved to the head of the ass and
pulled his ear to advance. Caeltia and
Finaun trod beside and they went forward.
Behind came Art sniffing with the hungriest
of nostrils on the sunny air, for it was five
hours since they had eaten and more than
three hours' abstinence was painful to him.</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page236" id="page236"></a>[pg 236]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER XXIX</h2>

<p class="indent">She did get food. She nourished her
three children sumptuously, but she made
them help her to get it.</p>

<p class="indent">She looked at Finaun's high nose, his
sweeping beard, his air as of a good child
well matured, and she sent it to the market:</p>

<p class="indent">"One must eat," said she.</p>

<p class="indent">When they came to a house by the roadside
she ordered Finaun to the door to ask
for bread; he got it too and had eaten but
the slowest mouthful when she seized it from
him and stocked it for the common good.</p>

<p class="indent">She charged Caeltia through the open
door of a cottage, and his expedition was
famous for eight hours afterwards.</p>

<p class="indent">She performed feats herself in a fowl-house
and a cattle-pen, but she did not
issue any commands to Art except at the
falling-to, when he obeyed adequately.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page237" id="page237"></a>[pg 237]</span>
She recalled the deeds of her father in
many predicaments, and for the first time
she really understood his ceaseless skill and
activity. She found too that she could
recollect his tactics, beside which her own
were but childish blunderings, and, with
that memory she mended her hand, and life
became the orderly progression which everybody
expects it to be.</p>

<p class="indent">That night by the glow of the brazier she
rested a mind that had never been weary
before, and she craved for the presence of
her father that she might gain from him the
praise which her present companions did not
know was due to her.</p>

<hr />

<p class="indent">"Two days more," said her heart, communicating
to her bitterly as they proceeded
on the morrow morning, but she banished
the thought and set to her plots and plans.
She banished it, but it clung with her, vague
and weighty as a nightmare, and when she
looked backwards on the road Art's eyes
were looking into hers with a quietness that
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page238" id="page238"></a>[pg 238]</span>
almost drove her mad. She could not
understand him.</p>

<p class="indent">They had never spoken to each other;
not once had they spoken directly since that
night when he stepped into the glow of the
brazier. At first she had fled from him in a
fear which was all shyness and wildness, and
so an overlooking habit had been formed
between them which he had never sought to
break, and which she did not know how to
put an end to.</p>

<p class="indent">"Two days!" said her heart again, pealing
it to her through her webs, and again she
exiled her heart, and could feel its wailing
when she could hear it no longer.</p>

<hr />

<p class="indent">They stopped for the mid-day meal;
bread and potatoes and a morsel of cheese;
the fare was plentiful, and from a stream
near by good water washed it down.</p>

<p class="indent">The reins of the donkey were thrown
across the limb of a tree, and he had liberty
to browse in a circle. He also had his drink
from the running stream, and was glad of it.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page239" id="page239"></a>[pg 239]</span>
As they sat three people marched the road
behind them; they saw these people, and
studied their advance.</p>

<p class="indent">A talkative, a disorderly advance it was.
An advance that halted every few paces
for parley, and moved on again like a
battle.</p>

<p class="indent">Two men and a woman were in that party,
and it did seem that they were fighting every
inch of their way. Certainly, they were
laughing also, for a harsh peal came creaking
up the road, and came again. Once the
laugh broke abruptly on its gruff note as
though a hand had pounded into its middle.
Then the party parleyed again and moved
again.</p>

<p class="indent">What they said could not be distinguished,
but the rumour of their conversation might
have been heard across the world. They
bawled and screamed, and always through
the tumult came the gruff hoot of laughter.</p>

<p class="indent">Said Caeltia:</p>

<p class="indent">"Do you know these people?"</p>

<p class="indent">"The woman is Eileen Ni Cooley," replied
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page240" id="page240"></a>[pg 240]</span>
Mary, "for I know her walk, but I don't
know the shape of the men."</p>

<p class="indent">Caeltia laughed quietly to himself.</p>

<p class="indent">"The taller of these men," said he, "is
the Seraph Cuchulain, the other man is that
Brien O'Brien we were telling you of."</p>

<p class="indent">Mary's face flamed, but she made no
remark.</p>

<p class="indent">In a few minutes these people drew near.</p>

<p class="indent">Eileen Ni Cooley was dishevelled. Her
shawl hung only from one shoulder and
there were holes in it, her dress was tattered,
and a long wisp of red hair streamed behind
her like a flame. Her face was red also, and
her eyes were anxious as they roved from one
to the other.</p>

<p class="indent">She came directly to the girl and sat beside
her; young Cuchulain set himself down
beside Art, but Brien O'Brien stood a few
paces distant with his fists thrust in his
pockets and he chewing strongly on tobacco.
Every now and then he growled a harsh
creak of a laugh and then covered it ostentatiously
with his hand.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page241" id="page241"></a>[pg 241]</span>
"God be with you, Mary Ni Cahan," said
Eileen Ni Cooley, and she twisted up her
flying hair and arranged her shawl.</p>

<p class="indent">"What's wrong with you?" said Mary.</p>

<p class="indent">"Where's your father?" said Eileen.</p>

<p class="indent">"I don't know where he is. When we
lifted from sleep a morning ago he wasn't in
his place, and we haven't seen him since
that time."</p>

<p class="indent">"What am I going to do at all?" said
Eileen in a low voice. "These men have
me tormented the way I don't know how to
manage."</p>

<p class="indent">"What could my father do?" said Mary
sternly, "and you playing tricks on him
since the day you were born."</p>

<p class="indent">"That's between myself and him," replied
Eileen, "and it doesn't matter at all. I
wanted your father to beat O'Brien for me,
for he won't leave me alone day or night,
and I can't get away from him."</p>

<p class="indent">Mary leaned to her whispering:</p>

<p class="indent">"My father couldn't beat that man, for I
saw the two of them fighting on the Donnybrook
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page242" id="page242"></a>[pg 242]</span>
Road, and he had no chance against
him."</p>

<p class="indent">"He could beat him, indeed," said Eileen
indignantly, "and I'd give him good help
myself."</p>

<p class="indent">"If my father owes you anything," said
Mary, "I'm ready to pay it for him, so let
us both rise against the man, and maybe
the pair of us would make him fly."</p>

<p class="indent">Eileen stared at her.</p>

<p class="indent">"I hit him once," continued Mary, "and
I would like well to hit him again; my
people here would keep his friend from joining
against us."</p>

<p class="indent">The blue eyes of Eileen Ni Cooley shone
with contentment; she slipped the shawl
from her shoulders and let it drop to the
ground.</p>

<p class="indent">"We'll do that, Mary," said she, "and
let us do it now."</p>

<p class="indent">So the women lifted to their feet and they
walked towards Brien O'Brien, and suddenly
they leaped on him like a pair of panthers,
and they leaped so suddenly that he went
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page243" id="page243"></a>[pg 243]</span>
down against the road with a great bump.
But he did not stay down.</p>

<p class="indent">He rose after one dumbfounded moment,
and he played with the pair of them the way
a conjurer would play with two balls, so that
the breath went out of their bodies, and they
had to sit down or suffocate.</p>

<p class="indent">"That's the kind of man he is," panted
Eileen.</p>

<p class="indent">"Very well!" said Mary fiercely, "we'll
try him again in a minute."</p>

<p class="indent">The camp was in confusion, and from that
confusion Art leaped towards Brien O'Brien,
but the Seraph Cuchulain leaped and outleaped
Art, and set himself bristling by the
elbow of his friend; then Caeltia, with his
face shining happily, tip-toed forward and
ranged with Art against these two, but
Finaun went quicker than they all; he
leaped between the couples, and there
was not a man of the four dared move
against his hand.</p>

<p class="indent">In a second that storm blew itself out, and
they returned to their seats smiling foolishly.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page244" id="page244"></a>[pg 244]</span>
"Let the women be quiet," said Brien
O'Brien harshly.</p>

<p class="indent">He also seated himself, with his back
touching against the donkey's legs.</p>

<p class="indent">The ass had finished eating and drinking,
and was now searching the horizon with the
intent eye of one who does not see anything,
but only looks on the world without in order
to focus steadily the world within.</p>

<p class="indent">Brien O'Brien stared with a new interest
at Finaun, and revolved his quid. Said he
to Cuchulain:</p>

<p class="indent">"Would the old lad be able to treat us
the way Rhadamanthus did, do you think?"</p>

<p class="indent">"He could do that," laughed Cuchulain,
"and he could do it easily."</p>

<p class="indent">O'Brien moved the quid to the other side
of his jaw.</p>

<p class="indent">"If he slung us out of this place we
wouldn't know where we might land," said
he.</p>

<p class="indent">"That is so," replied Cuchulain, thrusting
a sleek curl between his teeth. "I don't
know these regions, and I don't know where
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page245" id="page245"></a>[pg 245]</span>
we might land, or if we would ever land.
Only for that I would go against him," and
he waggled his finger comically at Finaun.</p>

<p class="indent">Art commenced to snigger and Finaun
laughed heartily, but Caeltia eyed Cuchulain
so menacingly that the seraph kept a
quiet regard on him for the rest of the day.</p>

<p class="indent">Peace was restored, and while they were
revolving peace and wondering how to
express it Patsy Mac Cann came on them
from a side path that ran narrowly between
small hills.</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page246" id="page246"></a>[pg 246]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER XXX</h2>

<p class="indent">When Mac Cann saw the visitors he
halted for an instant and then came forward
very slowly, with his head on one side
and his thumb rasping steadily on his chin.</p>

<p class="indent">He was staring at Brien O'Brien, and as
he stared he bristled like a dog.</p>

<p class="indent">"It's the man himself," said he, "the
man that stole my clothes."</p>

<p class="indent">O'Brien peeped upwards at him but did
not move.</p>

<p class="indent">"Sit down and hold your prate," said he,
"or I'll steal your life."</p>

<p class="indent">Mac Cann would have thrown himself on
his enemy, but at that moment he caught
sight of Eileen Ni Cooley and her face drove
the other out of his head.</p>

<p class="indent">He stared.</p>

<p class="indent">"It's yourself!" said he.</p>

<p class="indent">"It is me, sure enough, Padraig."</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page247" id="page247"></a>[pg 247]</span>
"You'll be going away in a minute, I
suppose," said he grimly.</p>

<p class="indent">He sat on the grass and there was peace
once more. He was sitting beside O'Brien,
and the ass was still thinking deeply with
his hocks touching against their shoulder-blades.</p>

<p class="indent">When he seated himself they were all
silent, for, in face of everything, Mac Cann
took the lead, and they waited for him to
speak.</p>

<p class="indent">O'Brien was looking at him sideways
with a grin on his hard jaw. He creaked
out a little laugh and then covered it up
with his hand as one who was abashed,
but Mac Cann paid no attention to him.</p>

<p class="indent">His attention was on Eileen Ni Cooley.</p>

<p class="indent">"You're a great woman," said he, "and
you're full of fun surely."</p>

<p class="indent">"I'm everything you like to call me,"
replied Eileen.</p>

<p class="indent">"Which of the men are you with this
time, or are you travelling with the pair of
them?"</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page248" id="page248"></a>[pg 248]</span>
"I don't want either of them, Padraig,
but I can't get away from them anyhow.
They won't let me go my own road, and
they're marching at my elbows for two
days and two nights, cursing and kicking
and making a noise every step of the way."</p>

<p class="indent">"They're doing that!" said Patsy.</p>

<p class="indent">"They are doing that, Padraig. It's
O'Brien is the worst, for the other fellow
is only helping him and doesn't care for
me at all. Catching me they do be, and
holding me...."</p>

<p class="indent">"Aye!" said Patsy.</p>

<p class="indent">"I can't get away from O'Brien," said
she, "and I thought that if I could find
yourself——"</p>

<p class="indent">"You were looking for me?"</p>

<p class="indent">"I was looking for you this time,
Padraig."</p>

<p class="indent">"Aye!" said Patsy, and he turned a
black eye on Brien O'Brien, and his eye
looked like a little, hard ball of stone.</p>

<p class="indent">"You'll be left alone from this day
out," said Patsy.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page249" id="page249"></a>[pg 249]</span>
"Mind yourself!" growled Brien
O'Brien. "Mind yourself, my hardy man,
or you'll waken up among the spooks."</p>

<p class="indent">Patsy held him with that solid eye.</p>

<p class="indent">"Spooks!" said he, and suddenly he
rolled on top of Brien O'Brien, his left
hand grabbing at the throat, his right fist
jabbing viciously with packed knuckles.</p>

<p class="indent">Down went Brien O'Brien's head and up
went his heels; then he gave a mighty
wriggle and started to come up, his hands
threshing like the wings of a mill. As he
came up they rolled, and now Mac Cann
was below; but Brien O'Brien's head had
disturbed the donkey, and, without emerging
from cogitation, the ass let his two
heels fly at the enemy of thought behind
him; Patsy saw for an instant the white
flash of those little hoofs across his face,
but Brien of the O'Brien Nation took
them full on his forehead and his brows
crackled in like the shell of an egg; he
relaxed, he sagged, he drooped and huddled
limply to Patsy's bosom, and for three
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page250" id="page250"></a>[pg 250]</span>
seconds Mac Cann lay quietly beneath
him, captured by astonishment.</p>

<p class="indent">The donkey had again related the infinity
without to the eternity within, and his
little hoofs were as peaceful as his mild eye.</p>

<p class="indent">Mac Cann tugged himself from beneath
that weighty carcass and came to his feet.</p>

<p class="indent">Mary and Eileen were both sitting rigid,
with arms at full stretch and their fingers
tipping straitly on the ground, while their
round eyes were wide in an unwinking
stare.</p>

<p class="indent">Caeltia was on his feet and was crouching
at an equally crouching Cuchulain. Patsy
saw the curl jerking as the lips of the
seraph laughed.</p>

<p class="indent">Art was frozen on one knee in the mid-act
of rising, and Finaun was combing his
beard while he looked fixedly at Eileen Ni
Cooley.</p>

<p class="indent">Twenty seconds only had elapsed since
Mac Cann rolled sideways on Brien
O'Brien.</p>

<p class="indent">The seraph Cuchulain was staring under
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page251" id="page251"></a>[pg 251]</span>
Caeltia's arm. He blew the golden curl
from his lips and sounded a laugh that
was like the ringing of silver bells.</p>

<p class="indent">"What will Rhadamanthus say this
time?" quoth he, and with that he turned
and tripped happily down the road and
away.</p>

<hr />

<p class="indent">Mac Cann regarded the corpse.</p>

<p class="indent">"We had better bury the man," said he
gloomily.</p>

<p class="indent">He took a short spade from the cart, and
with it he made a hole in the roadside.</p>

<p class="indent">They laid Brien O'Brien in that hole.</p>

<p class="indent">"Wait for a minute," said Mac Cann.
"It's not decent to send him off that
way."</p>

<p class="indent">He pushed a hand into his pocket and
pulled it out again with money in it.</p>

<p class="indent">"He should have something with himself
and he taking the long journey."</p>

<p class="indent">He lifted O'Brien's clenched fist, forced
it open, and put a silver threepenny-piece
into it; then he tightened the pale
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page252" id="page252"></a>[pg 252]</span>
hand again and folded it with the other
on his breast.</p>

<p class="indent">They wrapped a newspaper about his
face, and they threw the clay over Brien
of the O'Brien Nation and stamped it
down well with their feet, and as they
left him the twilight stole over the land,
and a broad star looked peacefully down
through the grey distances.</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page253" id="page253"></a>[pg 253]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER XXXI</h2>

<p class="indent">They walked through the evening.</p>

<p class="indent">Dusk had fallen and in the drowsy half-lights
the world stretched itself in
peacefulness.</p>

<p class="indent">They had come to a flat country that
whispered in grass; there were no more of
the little hills that roll and fall and roll;
there were scarcely any trees; here and
there in great space a beech swung its
slow boughs and made a quiet noise in the
stillness; here and there a stiff tree lifted
its lonely greenness, and around it the
vast horizon stretched away and away to
sightlessness.</p>

<p class="indent">There was silence here, there was deep
silence, and over all the dusk drowsed and
folded and increased.</p>

<p class="indent">With what slow veils the darkness
deepened! the gentle weaver spun her
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page254" id="page254"></a>[pg 254]</span>
thin webs and drooped soft coverings from
the sky to the clay; momently the stars
came flashing their tiny signals, gathering
their bright hosts by lonely clusters, and
one thin sickle of the moon grew from a
cloud and stood distantly as a sign of
gold.</p>

<p class="indent">But the quiet beauty of the heavens
and the quiet falling to sleep of the earth
had for this night no effect on one of our
travellers.</p>

<p class="indent">Mac Cann was ill at ease. He was
moody and irritable, and he moved from
Eileen Ni Cooley to his daughter and
back again to Eileen Ni Cooley and could
not content himself with either of them.</p>

<p class="indent">The angels were treading at the rear of
the cart talking among themselves; the
slow drone of their voices drifted up the
road, and from this murmuring the words
God and Beauty and Love would detach
themselves and sing recurringly on the air
like incantations.</p>

<p class="indent">Eileen Ni Cooley trod on the left side of
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page255" id="page255"></a>[pg 255]</span>
the ass. She trod like a featureless shade;
her shawl wrapped blottingly about her
face and her mind moving within herself
and for herself.</p>

<p class="indent">Mac Cann and his daughter went together
by the right side of the donkey,
and, as he looked constantly at his daughter,
his eyes were furtive and cunning.</p>

<p class="indent">He tapped her elbow.</p>

<p class="indent">"Mary," he whispered, "I want to talk
to you."</p>

<p class="indent">She replied in a voice that was low from
his contact.</p>

<p class="indent">"I want to talk to yourself," said she.</p>

<p class="indent">"What do you want to say?"</p>

<p class="indent">"I want to know where you got the
money that I saw in your hand when you
buried the man?"</p>

<p class="indent">"That's what I'm going to tell you
about," he whispered. "Be listening to
me now and don't make any noise."</p>

<p class="indent">"I'm listening to you," said Mary.</p>

<p class="indent">"What have we got to do with these lads
behind us?" said Patsy urgently. "They
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page256" id="page256"></a>[pg 256]</span>
are nothing to us at all, and I'm tired of
them."</p>

<p class="indent">"There's a thing to say!" quoth she.</p>

<p class="indent">"This is what we'll do. To-night we
won't unyoke the ass, and when they are
well asleep we'll walk quietly off with
ourselves and leave them there. Eileen
Ni Cooley will come with us and in the
morning we'll be distant."</p>

<p class="indent">"I won't do that," said Mary.</p>

<p class="indent">He darted at her a sparkle of rage.</p>

<p class="indent">"You'll do what I say, you strap, or
it'll be the worse for you!" said his violent
whisper.</p>

<p class="indent">"I won't do that," she hissed, "and I
tell you I won't."</p>

<p class="indent">"By the living Jingo...!" said
Patsy.</p>

<p class="indent">She came at him whispering with equal
fierceness.</p>

<p class="indent">"What have you done on the men?"
said she. "What did you do on them
that you want to run away from them in
the night?"</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page257" id="page257"></a>[pg 257]</span>
"Keep your tongue in your teeth,
you——!"</p>

<p class="indent">"Where were you for a day and a half?
Where did you get the money from that I saw
in your hand when you buried the man?"</p>

<p class="indent">Patsy composed himself with difficulty;
he licked his dry lips.</p>

<p class="indent">"There's no fooling you, alannah, and
I'll tell you the truth."</p>

<p class="indent">He glanced cautiously to where the
others were coming deep in talk.</p>

<p class="indent">"This is what I did. I went to that
place by Ard-Martin where we buried the
things, and I dug them up."</p>

<p class="indent">"Oh!" said Mary.</p>

<p class="indent">"I dug them up, and I took them away,
and I sold them to a man for money."</p>

<p class="indent">"Oh!" said Mary.</p>

<p class="indent">"They're sold, do you hear? And
there's no going back on it; so do what
I tell you about the ass this night and
we'll take our own road from now on."</p>

<p class="indent">"I won't do it," whispered Mary, and
she was almost speechless with rage.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page258" id="page258"></a>[pg 258]</span>
Mac Cann thrust his face close to hers
grinning like a madman.</p>

<p class="indent">"You won't do it!" said he. "What
will you do then against your father?"</p>

<p class="indent">"I'll go on to the place with the men,"
she stammered.</p>

<p class="indent">"You'll come with me this night."</p>

<p class="indent">"I'll not go," said she harshly.</p>

<p class="indent">"You'll come with me this night," said
he.</p>

<p class="indent">"I'll not go," she screamed at him.</p>

<p class="indent">At the sound of her scream everybody
came running to them.</p>

<p class="indent">"Is there anything wrong?" said Art.</p>

<p class="indent">"She's only laughing at a joke I told
her," said Patsy. "Make that ass go on,
Mary a grah, for it's walking as if it was
going asleep."</p>

<p class="indent">Caeltia was looking at Mac Cann so
fixedly, with such a severe gravity of eye,
that the blood of the man turned to water
and he could scarcely hold himself upright.
For the first time in his life Mac
Cann knew what fear was.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page259" id="page259"></a>[pg 259]</span>
"To-morrow," said Caeltia, "we will
be going away from you, let us be peaceful
then for our last night together."</p>

<p class="indent">"Aye," said Patsy, "let us be comfortable
for this night of all nights."</p>

<p class="indent">He turned away, and with a great effort
at carelessness he moved to the donkey's
head.</p>

<p class="indent">"Come on, Mary," said he.</p>

<p class="indent">Eileen Ni Cooley trod beside him for a
moment.</p>

<p class="indent">"What's wrong with you, Padraig?"
said she.</p>

<p class="indent">"Nothing at all, Eileen, just leave me
alone for a minute for I want to talk to
the girl."</p>

<p class="indent">"You can count on me for anything,
Padraig."</p>

<p class="indent">"I don't know whether I can or not,"
he muttered savagely. "Keep quiet for
ten minutes, in the name of God."</p>

<p class="indent">For a few dull seconds they paced in
quiet. Patsy moistened his lips with his
tongue.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page260" id="page260"></a>[pg 260]</span>
"What are you going to do, Mary?"</p>

<p class="indent">"I don't know," she replied. "What
man did you sell the things to?"</p>

<p class="indent">"I sold them to a man that lives near
by—a rich man in a big house."</p>

<p class="indent">"There's only one big house about
here."</p>

<p class="indent">"That's the house."</p>

<p class="indent">She was silent.</p>

<p class="indent">"If you're going to tell the men," said
her father, "give me two hours' law this
night until I get away, and then you can
tell them and be damned to you."</p>

<p class="indent">"Listen to me!" said the girl.</p>

<p class="indent">"I'm listening."</p>

<p class="indent">"There is only one thing to be done,
and it has got to be done at once: go you
to the place of that rich man and take the
things away from his house and bury
them back again in the place they were
buried. If you want any help I'll go with
you myself."</p>

<p class="indent">Mac Cann's thumb wandered to his
chin and a sound as of filing was heard
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page261" id="page261"></a>[pg 261]</span>
while he rubbed it. His voice was quite
changed as he replied:</p>

<p class="indent">"Begor!" said he.</p>

<p class="indent">"You're full of fun," said he, thoughtfully.
He covered his mouth with his
hand then and stared thoughtfully down
the road.</p>

<p class="indent">"Will you do that?" said Mary.</p>

<p class="indent">He thumped a hand heavily on her
shoulder.</p>

<p class="indent">"I will so, and I do wonder that I didn't
think of it myself, for it's the thing that
ought to be done."</p>

<p class="indent">And now as they marched the atmosphere
had changed; there was once more
peace or the precursor of it; from Mac
Cann a tempered happiness radiated as
of old: he looked abroad without misgiving
and he looked at his daughter with
the cynical kindliness habitual to him.
They trod so for a little time arranging
their thoughts, then:</p>

<p class="indent">"We are near enough to that house to
be far enough from it if there's any reason
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page262" id="page262"></a>[pg 262]</span>
to be far," said Mac Cann, "so this is
what I say, let us stop where we are for
the night and in the morning we'll go on
from here."</p>

<p class="indent">"Very well," said Mary, "let us stop
here."</p>

<p class="indent">Her father drew the ass to the side of
the road and there halted it.</p>

<p class="indent">"We'll go to bed now," he shouted to
the company, and they all agreed to that.</p>

<p class="indent">"I'm going to unyoke the beast," said
Mary with a steady eye on her father.</p>

<p class="indent">He replied heartily.</p>

<p class="indent">"Why wouldn't you do that? Let him
out to get something to eat like the rest
of us."</p>

<p class="indent">"There isn't any water," he complained
a minute later. "What will that animal
do? and what will we do ourselves?"</p>

<p class="indent">"I have two big bottles of water in the
cart," said Mary.</p>

<p class="indent">"And I have a little bottle in my pocket,"
said he, "so we're all right."</p>

<p class="indent">The donkey was unyoked, and he went
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page263" id="page263"></a>[pg 263]</span>
at once to stand with his feet in the wet
grass. He remained so for a long time
without eating, but he did eat when that
idea occurred to him.</p>

<p class="indent">The brazier was lit, the sacks strewn
on the ground, and they sat about the fire
in their accustomed places and ate their
food. After a smoke and a little conversation
each person stretched backwards,
covering themselves with other sacks, and
they went heartily to sleep.</p>

<p class="indent">"We will have to be up early in the
morning," was Patsy's last remark, "for
you are in a hurry to get back your things,"
and saying so he stretched his length with
the others.</p>

<hr />

<p class="indent">When a still hour had drifted by Mary
raised cautiously and tip-toed to her father.
As she stood by him he slid the sacks aside
and came to his feet, and they moved a
little way down the road.</p>

<p class="indent">"Now," said Mary, "you can do what
you said you'd do."</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page264" id="page264"></a>[pg 264]</span>
"I'll do that," said he.</p>

<p class="indent">"And get back as quick as you can."</p>

<p class="indent">"It's a distance there and back again.
I'll be here in the morning, but I'll be late."</p>

<p class="indent">"Bury the things the way they were
before."</p>

<p class="indent">"That's all right," and he moved a step
backwards.</p>

<p class="indent">"Father!" said Mary softly.</p>

<p class="indent">He returned to her.</p>

<p class="indent">"What more do you want?" said he
impatiently.</p>

<p class="indent">She put her arms about his neck.</p>

<p class="indent">"What the devil are you doing?" said
he in astonishment, and he tried to wriggle
loose from her.</p>

<p class="indent">But she did not say another word, and
after a moment he put his own arms about
her with a grunt and held her tightly.</p>

<p class="indent">"I'm away now," said he, and, moving
against the darkness, he disappeared.</p>

<p class="indent">For half a minute the sound of his feet
was heard, and then the darkness covered
him.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page265" id="page265"></a>[pg 265]</span>
Mary returned to her place by the
brazier. She stretched close to Eileen Ni
Cooley and lay staring at the moving
clouds.</p>

<p class="indent">In a few minutes she was asleep, although
she had not felt any heaviness on her eyes.</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page266" id="page266"></a>[pg 266]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER XXXII</h2>

<p class="indent">No one was awake.</p>

<p class="indent">In the brazier a faint glow peeped from
the white turf-ash; the earth seemed to be
holding its breath, so still it was; the
clouds hung immovably each in its place;
a solitary tree near by folded its wide
limbs into the darkness and made no sound.</p>

<p class="indent">Nothing stirred in the world but the ass
as he lifted his head slowly and drooped it
again; his feet were sunken in a plot of
grass and he was quiet as the earth.</p>

<p class="indent">Then I came softly, and I spoke to the
ass in the darkness.</p>

<p class="indent">"Little ass," quoth I, "how is everything
with you?"</p>

<p class="indent">"Everything is very well," said the ass.</p>

<p class="indent">"Little ass," said I, "tell me what you
do be thinking of when you fix your eye on
vacancy and stare there for a long time?"</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page267" id="page267"></a>[pg 267]</span>
"I do be thinking," said the ass, "of my
companions, and sometimes I do be looking
at them."</p>

<p class="indent">"Who are your companions?"</p>

<p class="indent">"Last night I saw the Cyclops striding
across a hill; there were forty of them, and
each man was forty feet high; they had
only one eye in their heads and they looked
through that; they looked through it the
way a fire stares through a hole and they
could see well."</p>

<p class="indent">"How do you know they could see
well?"</p>

<p class="indent">"One of them saw me and he called out
to the others; they did not wait, but he
waited for a moment; he took me in his
arms and he stroked my head; then he
put me on the ground and went away, and
in ten strides he crossed over the mountain."</p>

<p class="indent">"That was a good sight to see!"</p>

<p class="indent">"That was a good sight."</p>

<p class="indent">"Tell me something else you saw."</p>

<p class="indent">"I saw seven girls in a meadow and they
were playing together; when they were
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page268" id="page268"></a>[pg 268]</span>
tired playing they lay on the grass and
they went to sleep; I drew near and
stretched beside them on the grass, and I
watched them for a long time; but when
they awakened they disappeared into the
air and were gone like puffs of smoke.</p>

<p class="indent">"I saw the fairy host marching through
a valley in the hills; wide, silken banners
were flying above their heads; some had
long swords in their hands and some had
musical instruments, and there were others
who carried a golden apple in their hands,
and others again with silver lilies and cups
of heavy silver; they were beautiful and
proud and they marched courageously;
they marched past me for three gay
hours while I stood on the slope of a
hill.</p>

<p class="indent">"I saw three centaurs riding out of a
wood; they raced round and round me
shouting and waving their hands; one of
them leaned his elbows on my back, and
they talked of a place in the middle of a
forest; they pelted me with tufts of grass;
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page269" id="page269"></a>[pg 269]</span>
then they went by a narrow path into the
wood, and they rode away.</p>

<p class="indent">"I saw a herd of wild asses in a plain;
men were creeping around them in the long
grass, but the asses ran suddenly, and they
killed the men with their hoofs and their
teeth; I galloped in the middle of them for
half a night, but I remembered Mary Ni
Cahan, and when I remembered her I
turned from all my companions and I
galloped home again."</p>

<p class="indent">"Those were all good sights to see!"</p>

<p class="indent">"They were all good sights."</p>

<p class="indent">"Good-bye, little ass," said I.</p>

<p class="indent">"Good-bye, you," said he.</p>

<p class="indent">He lay along the grass then and he
closed his eyes, but I turned back and
crouched by the brazier, watching the
people while they slept, and staring often
into the darkness to see did anything stir
before the light came.</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page270" id="page270"></a>[pg 270]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER XXXIII</h2>

<p class="indent">Mac Cann strode through the darkness
for a little time, but when he found himself
at sufficient distance from the camp
he began to run.</p>

<p class="indent">There was not very much time wherein
to do all that he had engaged before the
morning dawned, and so he took to this
mode of activity, which was not one for
which he had any reverence. He was a
heavy man and did not run with either
grace or ease, but he could hasten his
movements to a jog-trot, and, as his
physical condition was perfect, he could
continue such a trot until hunger brought
it to a halt, for he was never fatigued,
being as strong and tireless as a bear.</p>

<p class="indent">He was the most simple-minded of men.
When he was engaged in one affair he could
not meddle with anything else, and now
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page271" id="page271"></a>[pg 271]</span>
that he was running he could do nothing
but run—he could not think, for instance.
When it was necessary to think he would
either walk very slowly or stand stock-still,
and then he would think with great
speed and with great simplicity. His head
bade his legs be quiet while it was occupied,
and, when they were in motion, his legs
tramped hush to his head, which obeyed
instantly; and he was so well organised
on these lines that there was never any
quarrel between the extremities.</p>

<p class="indent">It was, therefore, the emptiest of men
that now pounded the road. He would
deal with an emergency when it was
visible, but until then he snapped a finger
and forgot it, for he had learned that the
first word of an emergency is a warning,
the second a direction for escape, its third
utterance is in action, and it will only be
waited for by a fool.</p>

<p class="indent">Exactly what he would do when he
arrived at the house he did not know, and
as yet he made no effort to deal with that
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page272" id="page272"></a>[pg 272]</span>
problem: he obeyed the prime logical
necessity, which was to get there: once
there and the second step would push itself
against him, and from that cause the
most orderly of results would ensue. If
there was no trouble he would succeed
in his enterprise; if there was trouble
he would fly—that was his simple programme.</p>

<p class="indent">And meantime there was nothing in the
world but darkness and the rhythmic
tramping of his feet. These, with a faintly
hushing wind, kept his ears occupied. He
had much of the cat's facility for seeing
in the dark, and he had the sense of direction
which some birds have, so he made
good progress.</p>

<p class="indent">After half an hour's steady movement
he came to the house for which he was
seeking, and halted there.</p>

<p class="indent">It was a long, low building, standing
back from the road. There was a stone
wall around this house, and the entrance
was by an iron gate.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page273" id="page273"></a>[pg 273]</span>
Mac Cann touched the gate, for experience
had taught him that gates are
not always locked, but this one was locked
securely. By the gate was a caretaker's
lodge, so he moved quietly from that
place and walked by the wall.</p>

<p class="indent">There was glass on the top of the wall
which halted him for a few moments while
he sucked his incautious hand. To cope
with this he gathered several large stones
and placed them on top of each other and
he stood on these, then he threw his coat
and waistcoat over the glass and climbed
easily across.</p>

<p class="indent">He was in a shrubbery. About him
every few paces were short, stiff bushes,
some of which were armed with spines,
which did their duty on his hands and
the legs of his trousers; but he regarded
these with an inattention which must
have disgusted them. He tip-toed among
these guardians and was shortly free of
them and on a gravel pathway. Crossing
this he came on quiet flower-beds, which
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page274" id="page274"></a>[pg 274]</span>
he skirted: the house was now visible as
a dark mass distant some hundred yards.</p>

<p class="indent">Saving for one window the place was
entirely dark, and it was towards that
window he directed his careful steps.</p>

<p class="indent">"It's better to look at something than
at nothing," quoth he.</p>

<p class="indent">He was again on a gravel path, and the
stones tried to crunch and wriggle under his
feet, but he did not allow that to happen.</p>

<p class="indent">He came to the window and, standing
well to the side, peeped in.</p>

<p class="indent">He saw a square room furnished as a
library. The entire section of the walls
which he could spy was covered from
floor to ceiling with books. There were
volumes of every size, every shape, every
colour. There were long, narrow books
that held themselves like grenadiers at
stiff attention. There were short, fat
books that stood solidly like aldermen
who were going to make speeches and
were ashamed but not frightened. There
were mediocre books bearing themselves
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page275" id="page275"></a>[pg 275]</span>
with the carelessness of folk who are never
looked at and have consequently no shyness.
There were solemn books that
seemed to be feeling for their spectacles;
and there were tattered, important books
that had got dirty because they took
snuff, and were tattered because they had
been crossed in love and had never married
afterwards. There were prim, ancient
tomes that were certainly ashamed of
their heroines and utterly unable to obtain
a divorce from the hussies; and there
were lean, rakish volumes that leaned
carelessly, or perhaps it was with studied
elegance, against their neighbours, murmuring
in affected tones, "All heroines
are charming to us."</p>

<p class="indent">In the centre of the room was a heavy,
black table, and upon the highly polished
surface of this a yellow light fell from
globes on the ceiling.</p>

<p class="indent">At this table a man was seated, and he
was staring at his hands. He was a man
of about thirty years of age. A tall,
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page276" id="page276"></a>[pg 276]</span>
slender man with a lean face, and, to
Patsy, he was of an appalling cleanliness—a
cleanliness really to make one
shudder: he was shaved to the last closeness;
he was washed to the ultimate rub;
on him both soap and water had wrought
their utmost, and could have no further
ambitions; his wristlets gleamed like snow
on a tree, and his collar rose upon a black
coat as the plumage of a swan emerges
spotlessly from water.</p>

<p class="indent">His cleanliness was a sight to terrify
any tramp, but it only angered Mac Cann,
who was not liable to terror of anything
but hunger.</p>

<p class="indent">"I would like to give you a thump on
the head, you dirty dog!" said Patsy,
breathing fiercely against the corner of
the window-pane, and his use of the adjective
was singular as showing in what
strange ways extremes can meet.</p>

<p class="indent">This was the man to whom he had sold
the gear of his companions: an indelicate
business indeed, and one which the cleanliness
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page277" id="page277"></a>[pg 277]</span>
of the purchaser assisted him to
rectify, and it was in this room that the
barter had been conducted. By craning
his neck a little he could see an oaken
settle, and upon this his sacks were lying
with their mouths open and the gleaming
cloths flooding at the entry.</p>

<p class="indent">While he stared, the man removed his
fingers from his eyes and put them in his
pocket, then he arose very slowly and
paced thoughtfully towards the window.</p>

<p class="indent">Mac Cann immediately ducked beneath
the window-ledge. He heard the window
opened and knew the man was leaning his
elbows on the sill while he stared into the
darkness.</p>

<p class="indent">"Begor!" said Patsy to himself, and he
flattened his body against the wall.</p>

<p class="indent">After a time, which felt longer than it
could have been, he heard the man moving
away, and he then popped up and again
peeped through the window.</p>

<p class="indent">The man had opened the door of the
room which faced the window and was
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page278" id="page278"></a>[pg 278]</span>
standing in the entry. Now his hands
were clasped behind his back, his head
was sunken forward, and he seemed to be
looking at his feet, which is the habit of
many men when they think, for when the
eyes touch the feet a circuit is formed and
one's entire body is able to think at ease.</p>

<p class="indent">Suddenly the man stepped into a black
corridor and he disappeared. Mac Cann
heard about ten steps ringing from a solid
flooring, then he heard a door open and
shut, then he heard nothing but the shifting
and rubbing of his own clothes and the
sound his own nose made when he breathed
outwards: there was a leathern belt about
his middle, and from the noise which it
made one would have fancied that it was
woven of thunders—there was a great
silence; the lighted room was both inviting
and terrifying, for it was even
more silent than the world outside; the
steady globes stared at the window like
the eyes of a mad fish, and one could
imagine that the room had pricked up
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page279" id="page279"></a>[pg 279]</span>
invisible ears and was listening towards
the window, and one could imagine also
that the room would squeak and wail if
any person were to come through anywhere
but a door and stand in it.</p>

<p class="indent">Mac Cann did not imagine any of these
things. He spat on his hands, and in the
twinkling of an eye he was inside the
window. In three long and hasty paces
he placed a hand on each of the sacks,
and just as he gripped them he heard a
door opening, and he heard the footsteps
ringing again on a solid flooring.</p>

<p class="indent">"I'm in," said he, viciously, "and I
won't go out."</p>

<p class="indent">His eyes blinked around like the flash
of lightning but there was no place to hide.
He stepped across the oaken chest and
crouched down. Behind him, from the
floor upwards, were books, in front was the
big chest, and on top of it the two bulging
sacks. He was well screened and he could
peep between the sacks.</p>

<p class="indent">He stared towards the door.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page280" id="page280"></a>[pg 280]</span>
The clean man came in and stood aside.
Following him came a woman who was, if
anything, more rigorously washed than he
was. Somehow, although she was a tall
woman, she seemed as light as a feather.
She was clad in a delicate pink gown of
such gossamer quality that it balanced
and swam on the air with every movement
she made. Across her bare shoulders was
a lawn veiling, which also sailed and
billowed as she moved. Her hair seemed
to be of the finest spun gold, light as
thistle-down, and it, too, waved and floated
in little strands and ringlets.</p>

<p class="indent">These two people sat down at different
sides of the table, and for a time they did
not speak to each other. Then the man
raised his head:</p>

<p class="indent">"I got a letter from your mother this
morning," said he in a low voice.</p>

<p class="indent">The woman answered him in a tone that
was equally low:</p>

<p class="indent">"I did not know you corresponded with
her."</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page281" id="page281"></a>[pg 281]</span>
The man made a slight gesture:</p>

<p class="indent">"Nor did I know that your correspondence
was as peculiar as I have found it,"
said he.</p>

<p class="indent">Said the woman coldly:</p>

<p class="indent">"You are opening this subject again."</p>

<p class="indent">"I am: I have to: your mother confirms
everything that I have charged you
with."</p>

<p class="indent">"My mother hates me," said the woman,
"she would confirm anything that was
said of me, if it was bad enough."</p>

<p class="indent">"She is your mother."</p>

<p class="indent">"Oh no, she is not! When I ceased to
be a child she ceased to be a mother. We
are only two women who are so well acquainted
that we can be enemies without
any shame of each other."</p>

<p class="indent">"Are you not talking nonsense?"</p>

<p class="indent">"I have committed a crime against her.
She will never forgive me for being younger
than she is, and for being pretty in her own
fashion. She left my father because he
said I was good-looking."</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page282" id="page282"></a>[pg 282]</span>
"All that...!" said the man with a
movement of his shoulder.</p>

<p class="indent">"As to what she would do against me,
you should know it well enough considering
the things she told you before we were
married."</p>

<p class="indent">"You admitted that they were not all
lies."</p>

<p class="indent">"Some of the facts were true, all of the
colouring was false—they are the things a
loving mother says about her daughter!
but that is an old story now, or I had
fancied so."</p>

<p class="indent">"One forgets the old story until the
new story drags it to memory," said he.</p>

<p class="indent">She also moved her shoulders slightly.</p>

<p class="indent">"I begin to find these conversations
tiresome."</p>

<p class="indent">"I can understand that.... With her
letter your mother enclosed some other
letters from her friends—they insist on
the facts, and add others."</p>

<p class="indent">"Are they letters, or copies of letters?"</p>

<p class="indent">"They are copies."</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page283" id="page283"></a>[pg 283]</span>
"Of course my mother has forbidden you
to disclose the fact that she forwarded her
friends' private correspondence to you."</p>

<p class="indent">"Naturally."</p>

<p class="indent">"Very naturally; the reason being that
she wrote these letters herself to herself.
There are no originals of these copies."</p>

<p class="indent">"Again you are talking nonsense."</p>

<p class="indent">"I know her better than you do, better
than she knows herself."</p>

<p class="indent">There was silence between them again
for a few moments, and again it was
broken by the man.</p>

<p class="indent">"There are some things I cannot do,"
said he, and paused:</p>

<p class="indent">"I cannot search in unclean places for
unclean information," he continued, and
again the silence fell between these two
people.</p>

<p class="indent">She could bear that silence, but he
could not:</p>

<p class="indent">"You do not say anything!" said he.</p>

<p class="indent">"This seems to be so entirely your business,"
was her quiet reply.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page284" id="page284"></a>[pg 284]</span>
He moved a hand at that:</p>

<p class="indent">"You cannot divorce yourself from me
with such ease. This is our business, and
we must settle it between us."</p>

<p class="indent">Her hand was resting on the table, and
suddenly he reached to her and laid his
own hand on hers. She did not withdraw,
but the stiffening of her body was more
than withdrawal. He drew his hand away
again.</p>

<p class="indent">"We are reasonable creatures and must
question our difficulties," said he gently,
"we must even help each other to resolve
them."</p>

<p class="indent">"These difficulties are not of my making."</p>

<p class="indent">"They are, and you are lying to me
shamelessly."</p>

<p class="indent">Again between these people a silence
fell which was profound but not quiet.
That soundlessness was tingling with
sound; there were screams latent in it;
it was atrocious and terrifying. The man's
hand was pressed against his forehead and
his eyes were closed, but what he was
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page285" id="page285"></a>[pg 285]</span>
looking at was known only to himself in
the silence of his being. The woman sat
upright an arm's-length from him, and
although her eyes were wide and calm,
she also was regarding that which was free
within herself, and very visible to her.</p>

<p class="indent">"There are things I cannot do," said
the man, emerging as with an effort from
subterranean caves and secret prospects.
He continued speaking, calmly but tonelessly:</p>

<p class="indent">"I have striven to make a rule of life for
myself and to follow it, but I have not
sought to impose my laws on any one else—not
on you, certainly. Still there are
elementary duties which we owe to one
another and which cannot be renounced
by either of us. There is a personal, I
might say, a domestic loyalty expected
by each of us...."</p>

<p class="indent">"I expect nothing," said she.</p>

<p class="indent">"I exact nothing," said the man, "but
I expect that—I expect it as I expect
air for my lungs and stability under my
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page286" id="page286"></a>[pg 286]</span>
feet. You must not withdraw that from
me. You are not the individual you
think; you are a member of society, and
you live by it; you are a member of my
household, and you live by it."</p>

<p class="indent">She turned her face to him but not her
eyes.</p>

<p class="indent">"I do not ask anything from you," said
she, "and I have accepted as little as was
possible."</p>

<p class="indent">He clenched his hand on the table, but
when he spoke his voice was without
emphasis:</p>

<p class="indent">"That is part of my grievance against
you. Life is to give and take without
any weighing of the gifts. You will do
neither, and yet our circumstances are
such that we must accommodate each
other whether we will or not."</p>

<p class="indent">"I am an exact man," he continued,
"perhaps you find that trying, but I cannot
live in doubt. Whatever happens to
hinder or assist my consciousness must be
known to me. It is a law of my being:
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page287" id="page287"></a>[pg 287]</span>
it is my ancestral heritage, and I have no
command over it."</p>

<p class="indent">"I also," said she coldly, "am an heir of
the ages, and must take my bequests
whether I like them or not."</p>

<p class="indent">"I love you," said the man, "and I
have proved it many times. I am not
demonstrative, and I am shy of this
fashion of speech. Perhaps that shyness
of speech is responsible for more than is
apparent to either of us in a world eager
for speech and gesture, but I say the word
now in all sincerity, with a gravity, perhaps,
which you find repulsive. Be at
least as honest with me, no matter how
cruel you are. I cannot live in the half-knowledge
which is jealousy. It tears my
heart. It makes me unfit for thought, for
life, for sleep, even for death. I must
know, or I am a madman and no man any
longer, a wild beast that will bite itself
in despair of hurting its enemy."</p>

<p class="indent">The woman's tongue slipped over her
pale lips in a quick, red flash.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page288" id="page288"></a>[pg 288]</span>
"Have you anything to say to me?"
said he.</p>

<p class="indent">There was no reply.</p>

<p class="indent">He insisted:</p>

<p class="indent">"Are the statements in your mother's
letter true?"</p>

<p class="indent">"My mother's letter!" said she.</p>

<p class="indent">"Have I reason for this jealousy?" he
breathed.</p>

<p class="indent">Her reply was also but a breathing:</p>

<p class="indent">"I will not tell you anything," said
she.</p>

<p class="indent">Once again the silence drowsed and
droned between the two people, and again
they repaired to the secret places of their
souls where energy was sucked from them
until they existed only in a torpor. The
woman rose languidly from her chair,
and, after an instant, the man stood also.</p>

<p class="indent">Said he:</p>

<p class="indent">"I will leave here in the morning."</p>

<p class="indent">"You will let me see the boy," she
murmured.</p>

<p class="indent">"If," said he, "I ever learn that you
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page289" id="page289"></a>[pg 289]</span>
have spoken to the boy I will kill you, and
I will kill the boy."</p>

<p class="indent">The woman went out then, and her feet
tapped lightly along the corridor. The
man turned down the lights in the yellow
globes and stepped to the door; his footsteps
also died away in the darkness, but
in a different direction.</p>

<hr />

<p class="indent">Mac Cann stood up:</p>

<p class="indent">"Begor!" said he, stretching his cramped
knees.</p>

<p class="indent">About him was a great darkness and a
great silence, and the air of that room was
more unpleasant than any atmosphere he
had ever breathed. But he had the nerves
of a bear and a resolute adherence to his
own business, so the excitement of another
person could only disturb him for a moment.
Still, he did not like the room, and he made
all haste to get out of it.</p>

<p class="indent">He lifted the sacks, stepped carefully to
the window, and dropped them out. Then
he climbed through and picked them up.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page290" id="page290"></a>[pg 290]</span>
In five minutes he was on the road again.
Along it for some dozen yards he trod like
a great cat until he had left the gate-keeper's
lodge well behind him; then, with the sacks
across his shoulders, he shook to the steady
jog-trot which was to last for about three
hours.</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page291" id="page291"></a>[pg 291]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER XXXIV</h2>

<p class="indent">Mary awakened early.</p>

<p class="indent">The morning was grey and the sky flat
and solid, with here and there thin furrows
marking its gathered fields.</p>

<p class="indent">She raised her head, and looked towards
her father's place, but he was not there, and
the sacks were crumpled on the ground.</p>

<p class="indent">Finaun's great length was lying along
the ground, and he was straight as a rod.
Caeltia was curved a little, and one hand
was flung above his head. Art was rolled
up like a ball; his hands were gripped about
his knees, and he had kicked the sacks off
his body. Eileen Ni Cooley had her two
arms under her face; she was lying on her
breast, and her hair streamed sidewards from
her head along the dull grass.</p>

<p class="indent">As Mary lay back, for it was still too
early to rise, a thought came to her and she
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page292" id="page292"></a>[pg 292]</span>
rose to her feet again. She thought that perhaps
her father had come softly in the night
and moved the ass and cart away with him,
and that thought lifted her breast in panic.</p>

<p class="indent">She ran down the road and saw the cart
with its shafts poked in the air, and further
away the donkey was lying on his side.</p>

<p class="indent">She came back on tip-toe smiling happily
to herself, and, with infinite precaution, she
restored the sacks to Art's body and composed
herself again to sleep. She did not
raise the camp, for she wished to give her
father all possible time so that he might
return unnoticed.</p>

<p class="indent">And while she slept the sky unpacked its
locked courses; the great galleons of cloud
went sailing to the west, and thus, fleet by
fleet, relieved those crowded harbours. The
black cloud-masses went rolling on the
sky—They grew together, touched and
swung apart and slipped away with heavy
haste, as when down narrow waters an
armada weighs, filling listlessly her noisy
sails, while the slender spars are hauled to
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page293" id="page293"></a>[pg 293]</span>
the breeze; the watchmen stand at the
posts, and the fenders are still hung from
the pitching sides; almost the vessels
touch; the shipmen shout as they bear
heavily on their oaken poles; and then they
swing again, the great prows bear away, the
waters boil between, and the loud farewells
sing faintly to the waves.</p>

<p class="indent">And now the sky was a bright sea sown
with islands; they shrank and crumbled
and drifted away, islands no more, but a
multitude of plumes and flakes and smoky
wreaths hastily scudding, for the sun had
lifted his tranquil eye on the heavens;
he stared afar down the grey spaces, and
before his gaze the mists went huddling
and hiding in lovely haste; the dark spaces
became white, the dark blue spaces became
light blue, and earth and sky sparkled and
shone in his radiant beam.</p>

<hr />

<p class="indent">The camp awakened before Mary did,
and again the enquiry went as to the whereabouts
of her father:</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page294" id="page294"></a>[pg 294]</span>
"He will be here shortly," said Mary.
"He must have gone along the road to see if
there was anything he could find for us to
eat," and she delayed the preparation of
their breakfast to the last possible moment.
She spilled a pot of boiling water to that
end, and she overturned the brazier when
the water boiled again.</p>

<p class="indent">They were about sitting to their food
when Mac Cann came in sight, and she held
the meal until his arrival with his hat far to
the back of his head, the happiest of smiles
on his face, and a newspaper bundle in
his hand.</p>

<p class="indent">Mary gave him a look of quick meaning:</p>

<p class="indent">"Were you able to find anything for the
breakfast?" said she, and then she was
astonished.</p>

<p class="indent">"I was indeed," he replied, and he handed
her the bulky newspaper package.</p>

<p class="indent">She used that occasion to whisper to him:</p>

<p class="indent">"Well?"</p>

<p class="indent">"That's all right," said he, nodding at
the bundle, but really in answer to her query.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page295" id="page295"></a>[pg 295]</span>
She opened the parcel.</p>

<p class="indent">There were slices of bacon in it and slices
of beef; there were ten sausages in it and
the biggest half of a loaf—these, with a
small flat bottle full of rum and two pairs
of stockings, made up the parcel.</p>

<p class="indent">"Put the sausages in a pan," said Patsy,
"and share them round and we'll eat
them."</p>

<p class="indent">Mary did put them on the pan, and when
they were cooked she shared them round,
and they were fairly eaten.</p>

<p class="indent">After breakfast the pipes were lit, but
they rose almost immediately to continue
the journey.</p>

<p class="indent">"This evening," said Finaun, "we will be
saying good-bye."</p>

<p class="indent">"Aye," said Mac Cann, "I'm sorry
you're going, for we had a good time together."</p>

<p class="indent">The ass took his instructions, and they
went down the road. Their places were
now as they had always been—Finaun
and Eileen Ni Cooley and Mary Mac Cann
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page296" id="page296"></a>[pg 296]</span>
went with the ass, and there was no lack of
conversation in that assembly, for sometimes
they talked to one another and sometimes
they talked to the ass, but the donkey
listened no matter who was being talked
to, and not a person objected to him.</p>

<p class="indent">Patsy and Caeltia marched sturdily at
the tailboard, and they were close in talk.</p>

<p class="indent">Behind them Art was ranging aimlessly,
and lilting snatches of song. He did not
know the entire of any song but he knew
verses of many, and he was able to relate
the tunes of these so harmoniously, with
such gradual slipping of theme into theme,
that twenty minutes of his varied lilting
could appear like one consecutive piece of
music.</p>

<p class="indent">"That lad has a great ear," said Patsy.
"He could make his fortune at the music."</p>

<p class="indent">"He is a musician," Caeltia replied.
"That is his business when we are in our
own place, and, as you can see, it is his
pleasure also."</p>

<p class="indent">Patsy was in high spirits. Now that he
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page297" id="page297"></a>[pg 297]</span>
had successfully undone that which he had
done a real weight had lifted from him.
But the thing was still so near that he could
not get easily from it. His head was full of
the adventures of the last few days, and
although he could not speak of them he
could touch them, sound them, lift the lid
of his mystery and snap it to again, chuckling
meanwhile to himself that those who
were concerned did not know what he was
talking about, and yet he was talking to
himself, or to one cognisant, in hardy, adequate
symbol. A puerile game for a person
whose youth had been left behind for twenty
years, but one which is often played nevertheless
and by the most solemn minds.</p>

<p class="indent">It was with an impish carelessness that he
addressed Caeltia:</p>

<p class="indent">"It won't be long before we are there,"
said he.</p>

<p class="indent">"That is so," was the reply.</p>

<p class="indent">"You'll be feeling fine, I'm thinking,
when you get your own clothes on again."</p>

<p class="indent">"I have not missed them very much."</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page298" id="page298"></a>[pg 298]</span>
"I hope your wings and your grand gear
will be all right."</p>

<p class="indent">"Why should you doubt it?" returned
the seraph.</p>

<p class="indent">"What," said Patsy, "if they were robbed
on you! You'd be rightly in the cart,
mister, if that happened."</p>

<p class="indent">Caeltia puffed quietly at his pipe.</p>

<p class="indent">"They were robbed," said he.</p>

<p class="indent">"Eh!" cried Mac Cann sharply.</p>

<p class="indent">The seraph turned to him, his eyes
brimming with laughter.</p>

<p class="indent">"Aye, indeed," said he.</p>

<p class="indent">Mac Cann was silent for a few seconds,
but he did not dare to be silent any
longer.</p>

<p class="indent">"You're full of fun," said he sourly.
"What are you talking about at all?"</p>

<p class="indent">"Finaun and I knew all about it," said
Caeltia, "and we were wondering what
would be done by the person."</p>

<p class="indent">"What did he do?" said Patsy angrily.</p>

<p class="indent">Caeltia returned the pipe to his mouth.</p>

<p class="indent">"He put them back," said he.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page299" id="page299"></a>[pg 299]</span>
"Only for that," he continued, "we
might have had to recover them ourselves."</p>

<p class="indent">"Would you have been able to get them
back?" said Mac Cann humbly.</p>

<p class="indent">"We would have got them back; there is
nothing in the world could stand against us
two; there is nothing in the world could
stand against one of us."</p>

<p class="indent">Patsy jerked a thumb to where Art was
lilting the open bars of "The Wind that
shakes the Barley":</p>

<p class="indent">"Wouldn't the boy help?" said he.
"How old is the lad?"</p>

<p class="indent">"I don't know," smiled Caeltia. "He
remembers more than one Day of a Great
Breath, but he has no power for he has
never had being, and so did not win to
knowledge; he could give help, for he is
very strong."</p>

<p class="indent">"Could you have licked Cuchulain that
day?" said Patsy timidly.</p>

<p class="indent">"I am older than he," replied Caeltia,
"that is to say I am wiser than he."</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page300" id="page300"></a>[pg 300]</span>
"But he was up there with yourself and
could learn the tricks."</p>

<p class="indent">"There is no secrecy in this world or in
the others, and there are no tricks: there is
Knowledge, but no person can learn more
than his head is ready to welcome. That is
why robbery is infantile and of no importance."</p>

<p class="indent">"It fills the stomach," replied Patsy
cunningly.</p>

<p class="indent">"The stomach has to be filled," said
Caeltia. "Its filling is a necessity superior
to any proprietarial right or disciplinary
ethic, and its problem is difficult only for
children; it is filled by the air and the wind,
the rain and the clay, and the tiny lives
that move in the clay. There is but one
property worth stealing; it is never missed
by its owners, although every person who
has that property offers it to all men from
his gentle hands."</p>

<p class="indent">"You're trying to talk like Finaun,"
said Patsy gloomily.</p>

<p class="indent">They walked then in silence for ten
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page301" id="page301"></a>[pg 301]</span>
minutes. Every vestige of impishness had
fled from Mac Cann; he was a miserable
man; his vanity was hurt and he was
frightened, and this extraordinary combination
of moods plunged him to a depression
so profound that he could not climb therefrom
without assistance.</p>

<p class="indent">Said Caeltia to him after a little:</p>

<p class="indent">"There is a thing I would like to see
done, my friend."</p>

<p class="indent">Mac Cann's reply came sagging as he
hauled his limp ideas from those pits.</p>

<p class="indent">"What's that, your honour?"</p>

<p class="indent">"I would like to see the money thrown
into this ditch as we go by."</p>

<p class="indent">Patsy's depression vanished as at the
glare of a torch and the trumpet of danger.
He nosed the air and sniffed like a horse.</p>

<p class="indent">"Begor!" said he. "You're full of——.
There's no sense in that," said he sharply.</p>

<p class="indent">"That is what I would like to see, but
everybody must act exactly as they are able
to act."</p>

<p class="indent">"I tell you there isn't any sense in it;
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page302" id="page302"></a>[pg 302]</span>
give me a reasonable thing to do in the
name of God and I'll do it."</p>

<p class="indent">"That is the only thing I want done."</p>

<p class="indent">"What's the use of making a fool of me?"</p>

<p class="indent">"Am I demanding anything?"</p>

<p class="indent">When they had walked a few paces:</p>

<p class="indent">"What is it, after all!" said Patsy
proudly.</p>

<p class="indent">He thrust his hands into his pockets and
exhibited them full of gold and silver.</p>

<p class="indent">"Just a pitch of my hand and it's gone!"
said he.</p>

<p class="indent">"That is all," said Caeltia. "It's easily
done."</p>

<p class="indent">"So it is," growled Patsy, and he swung
his arm.</p>

<p class="indent">But he dropped the hand again.</p>

<p class="indent">"Wait a minute," and he called Eileen
Ni Cooley to his side.</p>

<p class="indent">"Walk with ourselves, Eileen, and don't
be a stranger. There's something I want
to show you."</p>

<p class="indent">He opened his hand before her and it
was flooding and flashing in gold.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page303" id="page303"></a>[pg 303]</span>
She stared with the awe of one who looks
on miracles.</p>

<p class="indent">"There's a great deal of money there,"
she gasped.</p>

<p class="indent">"There's fifteen golden pounds and some
shillings in it," said Patsy, "and here's all I
care for them."</p>

<p class="indent">He flung his hand then and sped the
money at the full force of his shoulder.</p>

<p class="indent">"That's all I care for the stuff," said he,
and he gripped her arm to prevent her
bounding to its recovery.</p>

<p class="indent">"Come on, woman dear, and leave the
ha'pence alone."</p>

<p class="indent">Said Caeltia:</p>

<p class="indent">"There is something I must throw away
also, for I am getting too fond of it."</p>

<p class="indent">"What's that?" said Mac Cann curiously.</p>

<p class="indent">"It's this pipe," the seraph replied, and
he balanced it by the mouthpiece.</p>

<p class="indent">"Don't throw away the good pipe,"
cried Eileen Ni Cooley. "Am I walking
beside a pair of wild men this day?"</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page304" id="page304"></a>[pg 304]</span>
Patsy interrupted also.</p>

<p class="indent">"Hold on for a minute. Give me the
pipe and you can take this one." He took
Caeltia's silver-mounted briar and he passed
to the seraph his own blackened clay.</p>

<p class="indent">"You can throw that one away," said
he, and he popped Caeltia's pipe into his
own mouth.</p>

<p class="indent">"It will do that way," said Caeltia sadly.</p>

<p class="indent">He held the pipe by the stem, and with a
sharp movement snapped it in halves; the
head fell to the ground and a small tight wad
of burning tobacco jumped from it at the
shock.</p>

<p class="indent">"There it is," said Caeltia.</p>

<p class="indent">He jerked the piece of broken stem from
his hand, and after sighing deeply they
marched on.</p>

<p class="indent">Eileen Ni Cooley was angry.</p>

<p class="indent">"Padraig," said she, "what made you
throw all the golden money away, and the
silver money?"</p>

<p class="indent">Patsy regarded her with the calm eye of a
king.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page305" id="page305"></a>[pg 305]</span>
"Stick your arm through mine, Eileen,"
said he, "and let us be comfortable as we
go along, for the pair of us haven't had a
talk for a long time, and Caeltia here wants
to talk to you as well as me."</p>

<p class="indent">"That is so," said Caeltia.</p>

<p class="indent">Eileen did put her arm in his, and as they
stepped briskly forward she stared at him
with eyes that were round with admiration
and astonishment.</p>

<p class="indent">"Aren't you the queer man, Padraig!"
said she.</p>

<p class="indent">"I suppose," said Patsy, "that you'll be
slipping away from us some time to-night?"</p>

<p class="indent">"Not if you want me to stay, Padraig."</p>

<p class="indent">They opened a new conversation on that.</p>

<hr class="hr2" />

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page306" id="page306"></a>[pg 306]</span></p>

<h2>CHAPTER XXXV</h2>

<p class="indent">That day they did not stay their travel,
even to eat.</p>

<p class="indent">Finaun was urgent, and they ate from
their hands as they marched. The ass
moved his slender legs briskly, the cart
rumbled, and the metals in it clashed and
thumped as the wheels jolted on the rutty
path.</p>

<p class="indent">They met no person as they went.</p>

<p class="indent">From the fields near by came the fresh
odour of wild grass that out-breathed again
to the sun his living breath; and the sun
shone, not fiercely, but kindly, tempering
down the oblique ways his potent fire;
above their heads and slanting away on
wide wings the birds were sailing, calling
a note as they went and calling again; here
were trees once more; their grave shadows
slept on the road, stamping the golden light
with a die of ebony, and their grave voices
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page307" id="page307"></a>[pg 307]</span>
whispered busily, quietly, like the voices
of many mothers who fold against fruitful
breasts the little children; so they crooned
and sang rocking their ample greenery on
the air.</p>

<p class="indent">In the afternoon they reached the hill,
close to the top of which the angels' finery
was buried.</p>

<p class="indent">When they had ascended this hill for
nearly an hour the donkey struck work.</p>

<p class="indent">He stood, and nothing would induce him
to move further in that direction. Indeed,
he slewed the cart completely round, and
pointed his nose and his shafts in the direction
which he considered reasonable.</p>

<p class="indent">They halted.</p>

<p class="indent">"He'll not go up there," said Mary, and
she pulled the long nose to her bosom.</p>

<p class="indent">"He will not," said her father. "Will
you leave that ass alone, Mary. Give him
back his snout and behave yourself like a
Christian girl."</p>

<p class="indent">"You leave me alone," said Mary, "what
harm am I doing to yourself?"</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page308" id="page308"></a>[pg 308]</span>
"It's that I don't like to see a woman
kissing an ass."</p>

<p class="indent">"Well, if you don't look at me you won't
see anything."</p>

<p class="indent">"You're full of fun," said her father
sternly.</p>

<p class="indent">He shrugged his shoulders and turned to
Finaun:</p>

<p class="indent">"He did this once before on us and we
going up a tall hill in Connaught, and
although I hammered the skin off his back
he wouldn't move a step; he's a great ass,
mind you, mister, and maybe we ought to
have looked for a gentler way up this hill."</p>

<p class="indent">Finaun was feeding tufts of grass to the
donkey, and the donkey was eating these
with appetite.</p>

<p class="indent">"There is no need to come further," said
Finaun. "We are almost in sight of the
place and can make our adieus here."</p>

<p class="indent">"Oh! we'll leave the beast," cried Mac
Cann, "and we'll all go up to see the last of
you."</p>

<p class="indent">"It is better that we should part here,"
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page309" id="page309"></a>[pg 309]</span>
said Finaun gently. "We do not wish to be
seen at the last."</p>

<p class="indent">"You can have it your own way," said
Patsy sulkily.</p>

<p class="indent">Finaun stood towering over Mac Cann;
he placed his hands on Patsy's shoulders
and solemnly blessed him in round language,
then he kissed him tenderly on either
cheek.</p>

<p class="indent">"Begor!" said Patsy.</p>

<p class="indent">And Finaun did the same for Eileen Ni
Cooley and for Mary, and he kissed the
two of them on their cheeks, then he laid
his palm on the donkey's muzzle and
blessed that beast, and he strode mightily
up the hill.</p>

<p class="indent">Caeltia advanced to Patsy, but Mac Cann
was embarrassed. He had been kissed by a
man, so he lit his pipe in self-defence and
kept it in his mouth.</p>

<p class="indent">"You're going off?" said he to Caeltia,
and he puffed like a chimney.</p>

<p class="indent">"I'm going off," replied Caeltia in a low
voice.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page310" id="page310"></a>[pg 310]</span>
Patsy took the pipe from his mouth and
put it into the seraph's hand.</p>

<p class="indent">"Here," said he, "take a last pull at that
and ease your heart."</p>

<p class="indent">Caeltia did take it, and he smoked it,
and it did ease his heart.</p>

<p class="indent">"I'll give you the spade out of the cart,"
continued Patsy, "for you'll have to dig
the things up. There it is, and it doesn't
matter whether it's lost or not."</p>

<p class="indent">"It is good-bye now," said Caeltia,
shouldering the spade, and he returned the
pipe to Patsy, who put it instantly in his
mouth.</p>

<p class="indent">Caeltia held out his hand and Mac Cann
put his own into it.</p>

<p class="indent">While their hands were together Patsy
was seized with compunction—he drew
the seraph aside a few paces:</p>

<p class="indent">"Listen!" said he. "I played a trick
on you the time I was taking the money out
of my pocket to throw it away."</p>

<p class="indent">"Yes?" said Caeltia.</p>

<p class="indent">"I let one of the gold pieces slip through
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page311" id="page311"></a>[pg 311]</span>
my fingers, and it's lying at the bottom of
my pocket at this minute, but I'll throw it
away, mister honey, if you say so."</p>

<p class="indent">Caeltia looked at him, and a smile of
great contentment crept over his lips.</p>

<p class="indent">"If I were you," said he, "I'd keep
it."</p>

<p class="indent">Mac Cann nodded at him very solemnly:</p>

<p class="indent">"I'll keep it," said he earnestly, "and
I'll spend it."</p>

<p class="indent">Caeltia then said his adieus to the others,
and he tramped up the hill with the spade
balanced in his hand.</p>

<p class="indent">The piece of gold was burning in Patsy's
pocket. He turned to Art:</p>

<p class="indent">"Well, young boy! there's my hand and
good luck be with you; give up racing
about and climbing trees and you'll be all
right; you've the makings of a good hand
on you, and that's a great thing, and you've
got the music."</p>

<p class="indent">"Good-bye," said Art, and they shook
hands.</p>

<p class="indent">Eileen Ni Cooley took his hand also, then
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page312" id="page312"></a>[pg 312]</span>
she and Patsy strode to the cart, and with
the donkey they moved down the hill.</p>

<p class="indent">Mary stood in front of Art, and she did
not look at him; she turned her grave face
away, and stared sidewards where the late
sunshine drowsed in gold on the rough
slopes. She put her hand out to him.</p>

<p class="indent">He took her hand and held it between his
own; he raised it to his lips and he held it
there pressing against his mouth.</p>

<p class="indent">He dropped it, and stood back a pace
staring at her; he struck his hands together
in a wild movement; he turned and ran
swiftly after his companions.</p>

<p class="indent">These two had never spoken to each
other.</p>

<p class="indent">Near the top of the hill he came on
Finaun and Caeltia, and the three went
together.</p>

<p class="indent">In a little they reached the point in the
road where they had slept during their first
night on earth, and where they had eaten
their first meal on a sunny morning. Distant
a few paces they saw the tree.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page313" id="page313"></a>[pg 313]</span>
Caeltia dug there until he uncovered the
sacks. He pulled these from the clay and
opened them, and each of the angels
retrieved his own belongings from the
medley.</p>

<p class="indent">Finaun was urgent and thoughtful. He
apparelled himself hastily, while, with less
speed, Caeltia also achieved his change.
But Art sat on the ground fingering his
raiment, and seemed to be lost in a contemplation
of the grass beside him.</p>

<p class="indent">Finaun was ready. He stood upright, a
kingly figure, shimmering in purple folds.
On his head a great crown, closed at the top;
across his shoulder a chain of heavy gold,
and depending on his breast a broad plaque
of gold that blazed.</p>

<p class="indent">He looked at the others and nodded, then
he leaped, and at a hundred feet the sun
flashed from his wings, and he looked like a
part of the rainbow.</p>

<p class="indent">Now Caeltia was ready, standing in
cloth of gold and lovely ornaments of
hammered silver. He scanned once more
<span class="pagenum"><a name="page314" id="page314"></a>[pg 314]</span>
the drowsing landscape; he smiled on Art;
he sprang aloft and abroad and sped upwards
in a blinding gleam.</p>

<p class="indent">Art raised himself.</p>

<p class="indent">He lifted the crimson robe that was
dashed with gold, the crimson buskins
feathered at the heel, the wide crown of
short points. He placed these on the
ground and stood for a time looking down
the road, while the many-coloured pinions
streamed lengthily from his hand.</p>

<p class="indent">Suddenly he frowned, and, with the wings
still dragging, he ran down the path.</p>

<p class="indent">In five minutes he came to the place where
they had left the ass, but it was no longer
there. Far below on the curving ways he
saw the donkey moving quietly. Mac Cann
and Eileen Ni Cooley were going by each
other's side, and Patsy's arm was about the
woman.</p>

<p class="indent">He looked around, and at a little distance
saw the girl beside a bush. She was lying
on her breast, her face was hidden into the
ground, and she was motionless.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page315" id="page315"></a>[pg 315]</span>
He walked to her.</p>

<p class="indent">"Mary," said he, "I have come to say
farewell."</p>

<p class="indent">She moved as at a shock. She rose to
her feet, and she did not look at him, and
this was the first time that these two had
talked together.</p>

<p class="indent">He bent to her beseechingly:</p>

<p class="indent">"I have come to say farewell," said
he.</p>

<p class="indent">Again she put her hand into his:</p>

<p class="indent">"Say your say," quoth she, "and go your
road," and with that she did look at him,
sternly.</p>

<p class="indent">He loosed her hand; his eyes flamed; he
stamped the road; he swung his arms aloft
gripping the wings, and, with a fierce movement,
he ripped them in twain; he put the
halves together and tore again, then, with a
sweep of his hands, fluttered the shining
plumes away and on the wind.</p>

<p class="indent">"Now!" quoth he, with a laugh.</p>

<p class="indent">"Oh!" she stammered, staring, terrified,
incredulous.</p>

<p class="indent"><span class="pagenum"><a name="page316" id="page316"></a>[pg 316]</span>
"Let you and I go down after the people,"
he said.</p>

<p class="indent">But Mary was weeping, and as they paced
down the narrow track he laid a great arm
about her shoulder.</p>