<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h3>
			<p>The ass stood quietly where he had been left.</p>
			<p>Rain was pouring from him as though he were the father of rivers and supplied the world with running water. It dashed off his flanks; it leaped down his tail; it foamed over his forehead to his nose, and hit the ground from there with a thump.</p>
			<p>“I’m very wet,” said the ass to himself, “and I wish I wasn’t.”</p>
			<p>His eyes were fixed on a brown stone that had a knob on its back. Every drop of rain that hit the stone jumped twice and then spattered to the ground. After a moment he spoke to himself again:</p>
			<p>“I don’t care whether it stops raining or not, for I can’t be any wetter than I am, however it goes.”</p>
			<p>Having said this, he dismissed the weather and settled himself to think. He hung his head slightly and fixed his eyes afar off, and he stared distantly like that without seeing anything while he gathered and revolved his thoughts.</p>
			<p>The first thing he thought about was carrots.</p>
			<p>He thought of their shape, their colour, and the way they looked in a bucket. Some would have the thick end stuck up, and some would have the other end stuck up, and there were always bits of clay sticking to one end or the other. Some would be lying on their sides as though they had slipped quietly to sleep, and some would be standing in a slanting way as though they were leaning their backs against a wall and couldn’t make up their minds what to do next. But, however they looked in the bucket, they all tasted alike, and they all tasted well. They are a companionable food; they make a pleasant, crunching noise when they are bitten, and so, when one is eating carrots, one can listen to the sound of one’s eating and make a story from it.</p>
			<p>Thistles make a swishing noise when they are bitten; they have their taste.</p>
			<p>Grass does not make any noise at all; it slips dumbly to the sepulchre, and makes no sign.</p>
			<p>Bread makes no sound when it is eaten by an ass; it has an interesting taste, and it clings about one’s teeth for a long time.</p>
			<p>Apples have a good smell and a joyful crunch, but the taste of sugar lasts longer in the mouth, and can be remembered for longer than anything else; it has a short, sharp crunch that is like a curse, and instantly it blesses you with the taste of it.</p>
			<p>Hay can be eaten in great mouthfuls. It has a chip and a crack at the first bite, and then it says no more. It sticks out of one’s mouth like whiskers, and you can watch it with your eye while it moves to and fro according as your mouth moves. It is a friendly food, and very good for the hungry.</p>
			<p>Oats are not a food; they are a great blessing; they are a debauch; they make you proud, so that you want to kick the front out of a cart, and climb a tree, and bite a cow, and chase chickens.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Mary came running and unyoked him from the cart. She embraced him on the streaming nose. “You poor thing, you!” said she, and she took a large paper bag from the cart and held it to his muzzle. There was soft sugar in the bag, and half a pound of it clove to his tongue at the first lick.</p>
			<p>As she went back to the house with the bundle of food the ass regarded her.</p>
			<p>“You are a good girl,” said the ass.</p>
			<p>He shook himself and dissipated his thoughts; then he trotted briskly here and there on the path to see if there was anything worth looking for.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
