<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-4" id="chapter-32" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</h3>
			<p>No one was awake.</p>
			<p>In the brazier a faint glow peeped from the white turf-ash; the earth seemed to be holding its breath, so still it was; the clouds hung immovably each in its place; a solitary tree near by folded its wide limbs into the darkness and made no sound.</p>
			<p>Nothing stirred in the world but the ass as he lifted his head slowly and drooped it again; his feet were sunken in a plot of grass and he was quiet as the earth.</p>
			<p>Then I came softly, and I spoke to the ass in the darkness.</p>
			<p>“Little ass,” quoth I, “how is everything with you?”</p>
			<p>“Everything is very well,” said the ass.</p>
			<p>“Little ass,” said I, “tell me what you do be thinking of when you fix your eye on vacancy and stare there for a long time?”</p>
			<p>“I do be thinking,” said the ass, “of my companions, and sometimes I do be looking at them.”</p>
			<p>“Who are your companions?”</p>
			<p>“Last night I saw the Cyclops striding across a hill; there were forty of them, and each man was forty feet high; they had only one eye in their heads and they looked through that; they looked through it the way a fire stares through a hole and they could see well.”</p>
			<p>“How do you know they could see well?”</p>
			<p>“One of them saw me and he called out to the others; they did not wait, but he waited for a moment; he took me in his arms and he stroked my head; then he put me on the ground and went away, and in ten strides he crossed over the mountain.”</p>
			<p>“That was a good sight to see!”</p>
			<p>“That was a good sight.”</p>
			<p>“Tell me something else you saw.”</p>
			<p>“I saw seven girls in a meadow and they were playing together; when they were tired playing they lay on the grass and they went to sleep; I drew near and stretched beside them on the grass, and I watched them for a long time; but when they awakened they disappeared into the air and were gone like puffs of smoke.</p>
			<p>“I saw the fairy host marching through a valley in the hills; wide, silken banners were flying above their heads; some had long swords in their hands and some had musical instruments, and there were others who carried a golden apple in their hands, and others again with silver lilies and cups of heavy silver; they were beautiful and proud and they marched courageously; they marched past me for three gay hours while I stood on the slope of a hill.</p>
			<p>“I saw three centaurs riding out of a wood; they raced round and round me shouting and waving their hands; one of them leaned his elbows on my back, and they talked of a place in the middle of a forest; they pelted me with tufts of grass; then they went by a narrow path into the wood, and they rode away.</p>
			<p>“I saw a herd of wild asses in a plain; men were creeping around them in the long grass, but the asses ran suddenly, and they killed the men with their hoofs and their teeth; I galloped in the middle of them for half a night, but I remembered Mary Ni Cahan, and when I remembered her I turned from all my companions and I galloped home again.”</p>
			<p>“Those were all good sights to see!”</p>
			<p>“They were all good sights.”</p>
			<p>“Good-bye, little ass,” said I.</p>
			<p>“Good-bye, you,” said he.</p>
			<p>He lay along the grass then and he closed his eyes, but I turned back and crouched by the brazier, watching the people while they slept, and staring often into the darkness to see did anything stir before the light came.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
